img1-Pneumothorax without tension
X-ray chest (PA view)
A thin white line represents the visceral pleura of the left lung (dotted line). No lung markings are seen peripheral to the visceral pleura (green overlay).
The appearance is consistent with a left pneumothorax. There is no evidence of contralateral mediastinal shift, diaphragmatic depression, or ipsilateral intercostal space widening to suggest tension pneumothorax.

img2-Surface anatomy of the lungs
ICS: intercostal space

img3-Tension pneumothorax
A tension pneumothorax develops secondary to one-way valve mechanism, which is caused by an injury to the lung parenchyma or chest wall and allows air to enter the pleural space during inspiration (valve open) but not escape during expiration (valve closed). Progressive accumulation of air within the pleural space causes an ipsilateral increase in intrapleural pressure, leading to ipsilateral lung collapse and mediastinal shift to the contralateral side. The mediastinal shift compresses the vena cavae, trachea, and the contralateral lung, leading to hemodynamic instability and hypoxia.

img4-Right anterior pneumothorax
CT thorax (axial view; lung window)
There is a loss of bronchovascular markings over the anterior aspect of the right lung.
These findings are pathognomonic of right anterior pneumothorax.

img5-Traumatic pneumothorax and subcutaneous emphysema
CT chest (with contrast; axial plane; lung window)
A displaced right rib fracture (dashed outline) is accompanied by pneumothorax (green overlay) and subcutaneous emphysema (blue overlay).
Posterior peripheral atelectasis (red overlay) is seen in both lower lobes, right greater than left.

img6-Rib fracture
X-ray chest (PA view)
There is a fracture of the right 1st rib. A faint line in the right hemithorax and absence of lung markings laterally indicate the presence of a pneumothorax (red overlay). Streaky translucencies in the upper thorax and along the heart borders represent subcutaneous (green overlay) and mediastinal (arrowheads) emphysema respectively.
These findings are consistent with a pneumothorax and subcutaneous as well as mediastinal emphysema as a result of a rib fracture.

img7-Stab wound to the chest
Anteroposterior chest x-ray, supine position (bedside x-ray) showing chest stab wound with hemopneumothorax and the penetrating object in situ.

img8-Flail chest
X-ray chest (AP view; supine) of patient with a history of trauma
Multiple right rib fractures (red lines) are present, some of which show marked displacement. There is extensive subcutaneous emphysema (examples indicated by arrowheads). The right lung is diffusely opaque (green overlay), likely reflective of pulmonary contusion in view of the trauma history.
White overlay: ribs

img9-Enlarged cardiac silhouette
Chest X-ray (PA view) of a patient with a history of pericarditis and clinical findings of tamponade
The cardiac silhouette is enlarged (globular water bottle-shape; enlargement highlighted by green-hatched overlay) due to pericardial effusion.

img10-Pneumothorax without tension
X-ray chest (PA view)
A thin white line represents the visceral pleura of the left lung (dotted line). No lung markings are seen peripheral to the visceral pleura (green overlay).
The appearance is consistent with a left pneumothorax. There is no evidence of contralateral mediastinal shift, diaphragmatic depression, or ipsilateral intercostal space widening to suggest tension pneumothorax.

img11-Tension pneumothorax
X-ray chest (PA view)
A large pneumothorax (green overlay) has resulted in collapse of the right lung along the mediastinum (edge marked by white dashed line). No bronchovascular markings are seen in the right hemithorax. Additionally, the mediastinum has shifted to the contralateral left side (blue line and arrows), the right hemidiaphragm is depressed (red line and arrow), and the right intercostal spaces are widened (example indicated by white arrows).
These findings are characteristic of tension pneumothorax.