Case 34: Vision loss

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Earl Griffin, a 66-year-old male, comes to the urgent care clinic because of vision loss.
Vital signs
Temperature: 98°F (36.7°C)
Blood pressure: 143/94 mm Hg
Heart rate: 70/min
Respirations: 17/min
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
Act like you can see very little on the left side, where everything appears dark and blurry. If the examinee tests your left field of vision by asking you to look straight ahead and then holding his/her finger out to your left side and moving it slowly in front of your nose, pretend not to see the finger until it is almost in front of your nose.
Use wrong words every now and then (e.g., “woman” instead of “wife” when asked about living arrangements) and pretend to have trouble finding the right words. Act frustrated when you make these mistakes.
Pretend to have weakness in your right hand. When the examinee asks you to squeeze her/his hand, barely squeeze it. If she/he asks you to lift your right hand, barely lift it.
Pretend to have decreased sensation in your right hand and lower right arm. When the examinee asks you if you can feel her/him touching you in those areas say “barely.”
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., CT) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: Ask “Am I going to die?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
I cannot see out of my left eye.

Onset
It started about 2 hours ago.

Constant/intermittent
It has been like this the entire time.

Precipitating events
I do not remember anything special happening, no.

Progression
In the beginning, it felt like a veil over my eye that kept getting darker and darker. Now it has not changed for about an hour.

Previous episodes
I have had this before, yes. Maybe 5 or 6 times over the past 6 months. But it always went away after about 10 minutes. 

Frequency
It maybe got a little bit more frequent. I think I had 2 episodes in the past 2 weeks.

Alleviating factors
None.

Aggravating factors
I do not think so.

Associated symptoms
I also have a headache.

Location
My entire head.

Intensity (on a scale from 0–10)
I would say a 4–5.

Quality
It feels like someone is squeezing my head.

Onset 
I have had headaches on and off almost every other day for the past 8 months.

Precipitating events
Nothing that I can think of.

Progression/constant/intermittent
They have been really bad since they started.

Radiation
No.

Alleviating factors
Sometimes I take some ibuprofen.

Aggravating factors
Not really, no.
Review of systems specific to recurrent vision loss and headache

Trauma 
No.

Nausea/vomiting 
No.

Fever/chills 
No.

Night sweats 
No.

Fatigue
I am always tired. It comes with the age. 

Racing of the heart
Yes, it is difficult to describe but sometimes it feel like my pulse does not have a normal rhythm. 

Rash/skin changes 
Not that I have noticed.

Cough 
Yes, I have had a cough for the past 3 years, mostly in the mornings, though.

Shortness of breath
Sometimes, when I walk too fast.

Urinary problems 
No

Bowel problems 
No.

Sleep problems 
I think I sleep alright, I usually get 6 or 7 hours per night.

Appetite
My appetite has seen better days. 

Weight changes
No.

Recent infections
No.

Dizziness
No.

Vertigo 
No.

Falls
Yes, once about 2 weeks ago. My right leg suddenly gave out on me and I fell. 

Weakness
My right hand started to feel a little weak right before you came in. 

Numbness
I do not think so.

Tingling
No.

Seizure
No.

Problems speaking
Not usually. I do not know what is wrong with me today. You must think I am stunned. I mean…stupid. 
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
I have high blood pressure and diabetes.

Allergies
None.

Medications
I take hydrochlorothiazide and metformin. And then ibuprofen for my headaches from time to time.

Hospitalizations
I had my appendix removed when I was in elementary school.

Ill contacts 
No.

Past surgical history
Only my appendix.

Family history
My father died of lung cancer.

Work
I am a retired elementary school teacher.

Home
I live with my wife. My daughter and my 5-year-old granddaughter moved in with us about 8 months ago because she lost her job and is getting a divorce. It has been pure chaos. It is really no wonder that I always have a headache.

Alcohol
Only if we go out to dinner, maybe every other month.

Recreational drugs
Never.

Tobacco 
Yes. I smoke about a pack a day. I think I started when I was 13.

Exercise 
No, not really.

Diet
My wife cooks. We usually eat biscuits and gravy for breakfast, a sandwich for lunch, and some type of meat with beans, corn, or mashed potatoes for dinner.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination

Inspection of the head

Palpation of the head

Visual acuity evaluation (Snellen chart)
Low visual acuity (< 20/200) on the left 

Direct fundoscopy

Visual field examination
Visual field deficit on the left
Neck examination

Auscultation of the carotid arteries 
Cardiovascular examination

Palpation of the radial pulse

Auscultation of the heart
Chest examination

Auscultation of the lungs
Neurologic examination

Assessing level of consciousness

Examination of orientation to person, place, and time

Assessing speech
Motor aphasia

Focused examination of the cranial nerves

Kernig sign 

Brudzinski sign

Meningism

Focused examination of passive and active motion
Muscle strength grading 1/5 in the right hand

Focused examination of sensation
Decreased sensation of the right hand and lower arm 

Focused examination of deep tendon reflexes

Focused examination of gait

Rapid alternating movement test

Finger-to-nose test

Babinski sign

Romberg test

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.
Suggested response to challenge: ”Mr. Griffin, I understand this must be a frightening experience for you, and I am glad that you came in to see me today. I will need to do a few tests and get some imaging done before I can tell you in more detail what is going on. However, I can promise you that you are in good hands, and that we are going to do everything in our power to take the very best care of you. If you would like to have a family member or a friend here for support, I would be happy to contact them for you. And if you have any questions or concerns while you are here, please make sure to let us know. It is important to us that you feel comfortable and informed. I also promise you that we will not take any steps that you do not agree with.”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Ischemic stroke: This patient has acute-onset focal neurological symptoms (L-sided vision loss, motor aphasia, R-sided hand weakness), which are highly suggestive of stroke. He also has multiple risk factors for stroke, including a history of smoking, hypertension, diabetes, and a possible atrial fibrillation, as well as the fact that he is > 65 years old and male. A carotid artery stenosis and resulting thromboembolism could cause decreased perfusion of the left ophthalmic artery (vision loss in the left eye) as well as the superior division of the left MCA (weakness of the left hand, sensory loss, aphasia).
Transient ischemic attack (TIA): While TIA is the likely cause of this patient's previous episodes of neurological symptoms, the duration of these current symptoms (2 hours and counting) should raise concern for stroke, since TIAs typically resolve after 1 hour (although per definition they can last up to 24 hours). Moreover, his symptoms are continuing to develop, with initial vision loss, then hand weakness and speech abnormalities starting around the time the examinee entered the room, and sensory loss appearing during the physical examination.
Intracranial neoplasm: Elderly patients with new-onset headaches should be evaluated for evidence of intracranial neoplasm, which in this case would also explain the patient's recent fatigue and loss of appetite. His smoking history and positive family history are risk factors for lung cancer, which can metastasize to the brain. However, intracranial neoplasm is only third on the list of differential diagnoses in this case because of the transience of the accompanying focal neurological symptoms up to now, which is more typical of TIA than a steadily growing intracranial neoplasm. The patient's home life changed drastically during the period when his headaches began, making tension headache a good alternative explanation for the new-onset headache.
Diagnostic studies
Pulse oximetry: to rule out respiratory derangements as the cause of this patient's neurological deficits and assess oxygen status
ECG and cardiac monitoring: to rule out atrial fibrillation as a cause of stroke and to assess for acute cardiac ischemia
CBC: to assess for a potential platelet disorder and the likelihood of systemic infection (i.e., leukocytosis)
PT, PTT: to assess whether the patient qualifies for fibrinolytic therapy and the likelihood of hemorrhagic stroke
Electrolytes, serum glucose: to rule out hyper-/hypoglycemia and/or an electrolyte imbalance as the cause of this patient's neurological deficits
Troponin: predicts neurological complications and outcome of stroke
MRI brain: identifies ischemia earlier than CT; best imaging modality for determining soft tissue abnormalities and vascularity, as seen in intracranial neoplasms 
Noncontrast CT head: gold standard and most important initial imaging in suspected stroke 
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Migraine
Intracerebral hemorrhage
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Seizure disorders
Meningitis
See also headache and differential diagnosis of intracranial hemorrhage.
Hyperintense lesions in cerebellar infarction
Hyperintense lesions in cerebellar infarction
Cerebral metastasis in lung carcinoma 2/2
Cerebral metastasis in lung carcinoma 2/2
Bilateral glioblastoma (butterfly glioma)
Bilateral glioblastoma (butterfly glioma)
Large left hemispheric cerebral infarct
Large left hemispheric cerebral infarct
Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Circle of Willis
Circle of Willis
Lateral view of important areas of the brain
Lateral view of important areas of the brain
Cortical homunculi
Cortical homunculi
Management of stroke
Management of stroke

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
