img1-Bruise on ankle of right foot
Right foot
A large flat purple macule on the lateral side of the ankle joint can be seen.
This is the typical appearance of ecchymosis often associated with a sprain or a fracture.

img2-Weber B fracture of the upper right ankle
X-ray (posteroanterior) of the right upper ankle: fibula fracture (fracture gap is marked by a green line) at the level of the syndesmosis (S). This finding indicates a Weber B fracture.

img3- and img4-Bimalleolar ankle fracture (1/2)
X-ray ankle (left; AP view)
A transverse fracture of the medial malleolus (dashed white line) is seen along with a comminuted fracture of the distal fibula (green outlines) at the level of the ankle syndesmosis (Weber B fracture; blue overlay). The ankle mortise is disrupted, with lateral displacement of both the talus (yellow overlay) and the tibial fragment (red overlay) in relation to the tibial shaft.
Red outline: distal tibia

img5- and img6-Trimalleolar ankle fracture
X-ray ankle (right; AP view) after supination-external rotation injury
An oblique fracture of the distal fibula (yellow overlay and red line) is accompanied by an avulsion fracture (red lines) of the medial malleolus (green overlay). The ankle mortise has been disrupted. There is widening of the medial compartment (indicated by white arrow) and lateral displacement of the talus (indicated by a black arrow). A lateral view (not included here) showed a fracture of the posterior malleolus.
The findings indicate an unstable trimalleolar fracture that requires operative treatment. If classified based on the location of the fibular fracture (Danis-Weber classification), this would be a Weber type B injury.

img7-Proximal fibular fracture (1/2)
X-ray right knee (AP view)
An oblique fracture (red overlay) of the proximal fibula (Fi) shows slight medial displacement of the distal fragment. Lateral subluxation of the fibula at the tibiofibular joint and widening of the distance between tibia (T) and fibula (double arrow) indicate disruption of the tibiofibular ligaments.
Fe: femur

img8-Proximal fibular fracture (2/2)
X-ray right knee (lateral view)
The oblique proximal fibular fracture (red overlay) shows no appreciable anterior or posterior displacement of the distal fragment.
Fe: femur; Fi: fibula; T: tibia