Case 38: Ankle pain

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Olivia Allen, a 28-year-old female, comes to the physician because of pain in her right ankle.
Vital signs
Temperature: 98.6°F (37°C)
Blood pressure: 120/75 mm Hg
Heart rate: 80/min
Respirations: 16/min
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
Wrap your right ankle in a bandage but leave out most of the right foot (including the heel and toes).
Use makeup, a pen, or paint to create a fake bruise on your right ankle. Alternatively, tell the examinee that there is a bruise on your right ankle after he/she removes the bandage. 
When your right leg is examined, pretend that it hurts to move the right ankle.
When your right foot is examined, pretend that it hurts if the examinee presses on your ankle and the sole of your foot.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., MRI) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: Your ankle is wrapped in a bandage. The examinee has to take off the bandage. Only then will it become evident that there is a bruise on your ankle.
Bruise on ankle of right foot
Bruise on ankle of right foot

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
My ankle hurts.

Location
It is my right ankle.

Intensity (on a scale from 0–10)
I would say that if I don't move the foot it is a 2. But if I move my foot it is really painful – I would give it a 6.

Quality
It is a dull pain.

Onset
It started 1 day ago.

Precipitating events
I was jogging and it was already dark. My right foot got caught and twisted up in a branch that was lying on the ground, and I tripped and fell. I'm training for a marathon right now, so this is really annoying.

Progression/constant/intermittent
It did not hurt right away but started a few hours later and has been pretty much the same since.

Previous episodes
None.

Radiation
Actually, the sole of my right foot hurts, too.

Alleviating factors
If I do not move my right foot.

Aggravating factors
If I move my right foot, it gets worse. But also standing on my right foot hurts.

Associated symptoms
None.
Review of systems specific to ankle pain

Swelling of the ankle 
Not that I have noticed.

Fever/chills 
No.

Rash/skin changes
I have not really looked today. Yesterday I did not see anything. 

Pain in joints
Apart from my right foot no.

Appetite
I have been trying to eat less because I want to lose some weight for the marathon.

Weight changes
I lost some weight because I wanted to. Due to my good workout and nutrition schedule I lost 8 pounds in the past 4 months. 

Recent infections
No.

Altered sensation of right lower extremity
No.

Weakness of right lower extremity
No.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
I had bacterial diarrhea a 2 months ago. I was given some antibiotics for it – think it was ciprofloxacin. 

Allergies
None.

Medications
I take a vitamin A supplement every day to keep my skin looking youthful.

Hospitalizations
Never.

Past surgical history
None.

Family history
My father has gout.

Work
I work as a business consultant.

Home
I live alone.

Alcohol
Sometimes I have a glass of wine when I go out to dinner.

Recreational drugs
Never.

Tobacco
No.

Exercise
I go running every day, because I have to train for this marathon. It is the first marathon that I will take part in. 

Diet
A lot of salad. I try to not eat too many calories. 

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Extremities

Examination completed with bandage removed

Inspection of the lower extremities
Hematoma over the right ankle 

Palpation of pedal pulses

Palpation of the the feet and ankles
Malleoli and sole tender to palpation on the right

Palpation of the right proximal fibula 

Focused examination of passive and active motion of the lower extremities
Movement of the ankle painful on the right

Focused examination of sensation of the lower extremities
After trauma to a joint, always assess peripheral blood supply as well as motor and sensory functions and compare them with the uninjured joint.
Bruise on ankle of right foot
Bruise on ankle of right foot

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee did not repeat painful maneuvers during physical examination.

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee appropriately reapplied the patient's bandage after the physical examination or told the patient that a nurse will come to reapply the bandage or apply a new bandage.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Ankle sprain: This type of injury is typically caused by a supination trauma or, less commonly, by a pronation trauma. The twisting movement the patient describes as the mechanism of injury in her case could also cause an ankle sprain. Symptoms include pain, tenderness to palpation, and hematoma, which are all seen in this patient. Although other symptoms of ankle sprain, such as increased joint laxity and tissue swelling, have not been found here, the lack of visible deformities and the relatively mild pain at rest make an ankle sprain the most likely diagnosis.
Ankle fracture is often caused by a supination or pronation injury due to a fall and can also be associated with pain, hematoma, and tenderness to palpation. However, the injury typically becomes apparent immediately after the trauma and presents with visible deformities, swelling, and/or intense pain, making it only the second most likely differential diagnosis in this case.
Metatarsal stress fracture: Stress fractures occur due to an increased load or increased frequency of physical activity (e.g., while training for a marathon). Caloric restriction and female sex are risk factors for stress fractures. Typical symptoms of a metatarsal fracture include swelling, tenderness, and pain in the forefoot with activity, which is relieved with rest. Although the fact that this patient's pain did not begin immediately after the injury makes a stress fracture likely, it would not explain her ankle pain and hematoma, making it only the third most likely differential diagnosis.
Remember that findings such as swelling and joint laxity are difficult to for the patient to simulate. They will almost always be negative in the exam even if they would likely be present in a real patient.
Diagnostic studies
X-ray of the R foot and ankle: to assess for fractures 
X-ray of the R fibula: to assess for associated fractures of the fibula 
MRI of the right foot: definitive diagnosis of a stress fracture; conventional x-rays can appear normal in the first 2–3 weeks
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Muscle strain
Fracture of other bones of the foot (e.g., navicular fracture)
Achillodynia (achilles tendinopathy)
See also sports injuries.
Bimalleolar ankle fracture (1/2)
Bimalleolar ankle fracture (1/2)
Weber B fracture of the upper right ankle
Weber B fracture of the upper right ankle
Trimalleolar ankle fracture
Trimalleolar ankle fracture
Proximal fibular fracture (1/2)
Proximal fibular fracture (1/2)
Proximal fibular fracture (2/2)
Proximal fibular fracture (2/2)

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
