img1-Digital clubbing
The fingers show symptoms of gross clubbing. The distal end of the finger is thickened, with increased convexity of the nail fold.

img2-Cavitary lung lesion (1/2)
X-ray chest (PA view) of a patient with lung carcinoma
A cavitary lesion containing an air-fluid level (red line) is seen in the right middle lobe, which is also opacified (green overlay) from air space consolidation. The consolidation abuts the minor fissure (black dashed line) and obscures the right heart border (silhouette sign).
The major diagnostic considerations for the cavitary lesion would include abscess or cavitary carcinoma.
White dashed line: approximate location of the right heart border

img3-Cavitary lung lesion (2/2)
X-ray chest (lateral view)
A cavitary lesion containing an air-fluid level (red line) is seen in the right middle lobe, which is opacified from air space consolidation (green overlay). The consolidation abuts the minor fissure superiorly and the right major fissure inferiorly. The fissures are slightly displaced toward the consolidation consistent with some concomitant volume loss.
UL: upper lobe; ML: middle lobe; LL: lower lobe; White and black dashed line: minor and major fissures

img4-Pulmonary tuberculosis in the left upper lobe
X-ray chest (PA view; lateral view)
A heterogeneous partially circumscribed consolidation is present in the left upper lobe.
The consolidation represented pulmonary parenchymal tuberculosis.

img5- and img6-Left upper lobe pneumonia 1/2
X-ray chest (PA view)
A large area of opacification (green overlay) in the left lung obscures pulmonary vessels, the left heart border, and the left hilum. Air bronchograms are visible (indicated by red lines), consistent with the presence of air space disease. Non-visualization of the hilum limits the ability to assess for a central mass.

img7-Mycobacterium tuberculosis culture
A culture of M. tuberculosis in a petri dish on agar
After 3-4 weeks of incubation, characteristic rough, cauliflower-like, whitish-yellow colonies appear.
The complex waxy, lipid-rich cell wall of M. tuberculosis is hard to overcome for nutrients, which is why the reduplication time amounts to 12-18 hours and incubation lasts at least 3-4 weeks.

img8-Evaluation of solitary pulmonary nodules