Case 17: Forgetfulness

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Grace Ramirez, a 70-year-old female, comes to the doctor’s office because of forgetfulness.
Vital signs
Temperature: 97.7°F (36.5°C)
Blood pressure: 125/70 mm Hg
Heart rate: 70/min
Respirations: 18/min
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
Act forgetful but do not seem overly concerned about it.
When the examinee tests your orientation and memory, respond with the answers provided in the examination section.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., CT, MRI) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: Be very talkative and try to tell a story about your life once or twice when the examinee asks you about your family. If the examinee is friendly, appears interested, and does not interrupt you, quickly finish the story and let him/her ask the next question.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over or clicking on the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form or the abbreviation list will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
My daughter wanted me to come. She says I have been very forgetful lately.

Onset
For about 2 years.

Constant/intermittent
She says I am always this forgetful. I believe she is being a little bit dramatic. 

Precipitating events
None.

Progression
My daughter says it has gotten worse.

Previous episodes
None.

Alleviating factors
I think it is a little bit better if I get enough sleep.

Aggravating factors
None.

Associated symptoms
I cannot think of anything right now.
Review of systems specific to forgetfulness

Trauma 
None.

Headache 
None.

Fatigue 
Yes, I have been feeling really tired lately.

Urinary problems 
Sometimes I cannot get to the bathroom in time.

How often
Maybe once per day. Especially when I wake up in the morning and really have to go.

Bowel problems
No.

Sleep problems 
I do not sleep much. I cannot fall asleep, and then I usually wake back up around 4:00–5:00 AM.

Appetite 
I do not have much of an appetite.

Weight changes
I would not know, I do not weigh myself.

Recent infections 
None.

Dizziness
Sometimes, if I stand up too quickly.

Problems walking 
No.

Falls
No.

Cold intolerance 
No.

Dry hair
No.

Getting lost
I did, maybe once or twice. My neighborhood is just changing so much. I always ended up running into my daughter, though, so it was no problem.

Hallucinations 
No.

Weakness 
No.

Numbness
No.

Tingling
No.

Assistance required for dressing, eating, walking, going to the bathroom, or personal grooming 
I do all of this with no problems. Well, other than my accidents on the way to the bathroom.

Assistance required for shopping, housework, personal accounting, cooking, transportation, or medications 
My daughter does all of those things for me.

Mood 
My mood has not been great since my poodle died about a year ago.

Loss of interest
I used to play backgammon with my girlfriends, but I no longer go.

Guilt/low self-esteem
No.

Low energy
Like I said, I always feel tired. I think it comes with the age.

Poor concentration
I cannot seem to concentrate on anything. I constantly forget to finish things I start working on, like my crossword in the morning.

Psychomotor agitation or retardation 
No.

Suicidality 
No.

Social support
My daughter takes very good care of me.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
I have high blood pressure. 

Allergies
None.

Medications 
I take hydrochlorothiazide.

Hospitalizations
I had to go to the hospital for the delivery of my two kids and when I had my gallbladder removed about 20 years ago.

Past surgical history
Just the times when I had to go to the hospital.

Family history
My father died in World War II but was healthy, as a far as I know. My mother was healthy, too, but she caught pneumonia when she was very old and died about 3 years ago.

Work
Well, I am retired now. But I owned and ran my own café downtown for many years.

Home
I live by myself, but my daughter lives in the house right next door.

Alcohol 
No.

Recreational drugs
Never.

Tobacco
Never.

Exercise 
No.

Diet 
My daughter cooks for me, but she does not have much time. We mostly eat freezer meals.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping

Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination
Inspection of the head 
Palpation of the head 

Neck examination
Examination of the thyroid gland

Extremities 
Inspection of the hands
Inspection of the lower extremities

Skin examination 

Neurologic examination
Focused examination of the cranial nerves
Focused examination of passive and active motion
Focused examination of sensation
Focused examination of deep tendon reflexes
Focused examination of gait 
Rapid alternating movement test
Finger-to-nose test
Babinski sign
Romberg test

Mini-mental state examination
Orientation to time 
(Answer with incorrect day, date, and month, but correct season and year; or answer with incorrect president of United States)
Orientation to place 
(Answer with the correct state, but only say “I am at the hospital close to home” to all other questions.)
Orientation to person 
My name is Grace Ramirez. I am 70 years old. My birthday is on May 14th.
Repeat these three words: house, ball, tree 
House, ball, tree.
Spell world (W-O-R-L-D) backwards 
D-L-R-W-O
Repeat the three words I told you earlier 
I only remember “house”.
Show patient your pen and the paper and ask her to name the objects
Pen and paper.
Repeat the phrase: “No ifs, ands, or buts” 
(Do as the examinee says.)
Read what I wrote on this piece of paper, and do what it says 
(Read out loud correctly.)
Write any sentence on the paper 
(Write: “I am Grace Ramirez.”)
Now fold the piece of paper and put it on the floor
(Do as the examinee says and fold the piece of paper and put it on the floor.)
Copy picture of two intersecting pentagons 
(Copy the picture incorrectly.)
Examination of the Thyroid - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Thyroid - Clinical Examination
Figure of intersecting pentagons (MMSE)
Figure of intersecting pentagons (MMSE)

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling for patients with memory loss and/or cognitive impairment.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge (was friendly, appeared interested in the patient's story, and did not interrupt the patient).

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Alzheimer disease: Memory impairment is the cardinal symptom of Alzheimer disease. It is typically insidious and affects memory of recent events (i.e., the ability to remember 3 words a few minutes after repeating them). Other cognitive domains are typically also affected, presenting in this case with impaired spatial orientation (i.e., getting lost), impaired orientation (to time in this case), and impaired attention (i.e., inability to spell a word backwards). This patient is also at higher risk of Alzheimer disease because of her age, sex, history of hypertension, and lack of exercise.
Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH): The triad of normal pressure hydrocephalus consists of urinary incontinence, dementia, and gait impairment, and this patient does have the first two features. However, her lack of gait impairment makes this diagnosis less likely than Alzheimer disease.
Pseudodementia: Depression can cause memory impairment (which is then called pseudodementia) among many other symptoms, some of which this patient has: fatigue, low mood, loss of interest, lack of energy, inability to concentrate, poor sleep, and poor appetite. However, depression symptoms can also be symptoms of Alzheimer disease, which is more likely in this case because the patient's forgetfulness pre-dates her depression symptoms. Moreover, the onset of pseudodementia is usually sudden, rather than insidious, as in this case.
Diagnostic studies
MRI brain: In the case of Alzheimer disease, generalized or focal cerebral atrophy may be visible.  Normal pressure hydrocephalus would show dilatation of ventricles with periventricular hyperintensities. Vascular dementia would show multiple lacunar and white matter lesions. A neoplastic cause of dementia would be best visualized via MRI.
CBC: Vitamin B12 deficiency would manifest with megaloblastic anemia on CBC as well as thrombocytopenia and/or leukopenia in some cases. Anemia can cause fatigue.
TSH: to rule out hypothyroidism as a cause of this patient's cognitive symptoms
Serum B12: to rule out B12 deficiency as the cause of memory impairment
Glucose, electrolytes: to rule out imbalances in glucose and electrolytes as causes of the patient's cognitive symptoms (e.g., hypoglycemia, hypernatremia)
Cranial CT: In the case of Alzheimer disease, generalized or focal cerebral atrophy may be visible. Normal pressure hydrocephalus would show dilatation of ventricles with periventricular hyperintensities.  Vascular dementia could result in microangiopathic lesions in the white matter as well as multiple lacunar lesions. 
Lumbar puncture: would alleviate the symptoms in NPH (both diagnostic and therapeutic); would show ↓ amyloid beta and ↑ phosphorylated tau in Alzheimer disease
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Vascular dementia
Lewy body dementia
Hypothyroidism
Vitamin B12 deficiency
See also “Differential diagnosis” of major neurocognitive disorder.
Cerebral atrophy in Alzheimer disease
Cerebral atrophy in Alzheimer disease
Cerebral atrophy in Alzheimer disease 3/3
Cerebral atrophy in Alzheimer disease 3/3
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Normal pressure hydrocephalus
Subcortical atherosclerotic encephalopathy 1/2
Subcortical atherosclerotic encephalopathy 1/2

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
