Case 23: Hearing loss

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Marvin Baker, a 65-year-old male, comes to the doctor's office because of hearing loss.
Vital signs
Temperature: 97.7°F (36.5°C)
Blood pressure: 120/80 mm Hg
Heart rate: 62/min
Respirations: 15/min
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
When the examinee tests your hearing by whispering or rubbing his/her fingers next to your ear, pretend not to hear on either side.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., audiometry) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: Pretend to have trouble understanding the examinee unless she/he speaks in a loud voice and articulates him- or herself clearly.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over or clicking on the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form or the abbreviation list will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
I cannot hear well anymore.

Both ears or single ear
I think it is the same with both ears.

All sounds/ specific sounds 
Hmm, I think I hear higher tones a little less. I have a really hard time understanding my granddaughter sometimes.

Onset
It started about 5 years ago.

Constant/intermittent
It is there all the time.

Precipitating events
None.

Progression
It stayed almost the same for a while but it has gotten worse, especially in the past year. 

Previous episodes
Never.

Alleviating factors
None.

Aggravating factors
When I attend family gatherings and a lot of people are speaking, it is hard for me to follow conversations. 

Associated symptoms
None.
It is important to have the patient specify if both ears are affected, as this narrows down the possible differential diagnoses.
Review of systems specific to hearing loss

Trauma 
No.

Headache 
No.

Nausea/vomiting 
No.

Rash/skin changes 
No.

Recent infections 
None.

Dizziness 
No.

Recent exposure to sudden loud noise
Not that I remember.

Tinnitus 
No.

Ear pain
No.

Ear discharge 
No.

Weakness 
No.

Numbness
No.

Tingling
No.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history 
I was treated for bladder cancer 3 years ago and got chemotherapy. And I have chronic shoulder pain.

Type of chemotherapy 
It was something with “platin” in its name, maybe “cisplatin”?

Allergies
Penicillin

Describe allergic reaction
When I took it once, I felt very nauseous and short of breath.

Medications 
I have been taking aspirin because of my chronic shoulder pain for the past 6 months. I take it daily, often more than one 500 mg pill.

Hospitalizations
Because of my bladder cancer, I had to go to the hospital several times.

Past surgical history
I had my bladder, prostate, and some lymph nodes removed because of the cancer. 

Family history 
My dad died from a heart attack when he was 72 years old.

Work
I am almost retired. I work in a steel plant. When I was younger I worked in the factory, but nowadays I just do some paperwork in an office. I'm too old for heavier work.

Noise level at workplace, ear protection 
Not in the office. But in the factory it was loud sometimes. Most of the time I used my headphones, but sometimes I forgot to put them on.

Home
I live with my wife. Our son moved out years ago.

Alcohol
I often drink a beer after work, but not more than one.

Recreational drugs
Never!

Tobacco 
Yes, I smoke. I have smoked a pack a day for the past 42 years.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination

Palpation of the head

Inspection of the ears 

Palpation of the ears

Otoscopy 

Rinne test and Weber test 
Neurologic examination

Focused examination of the cranial nerves

Focused examination of hearing
Decreased hearing bilaterally
When screening for hearing loss, examine each ear individually (ask the patient to cover the other ear) in a quiet room.
Examination and surface anatomy of the tympanic membrane
Examination and surface anatomy of the tympanic membrane
Weber and Rinne Test - Clinical Examination
Weber and Rinne Test - Clinical Examination
Rinne and Weber tuning fork tests
Rinne and Weber tuning fork tests

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling on smoking cessation. 

Examinee counseled patient to reduce intake of aspirin. 

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge: articulated herself/himself clearly, spoke in a loud voice

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Presbycusis: In older patients (> 50 years), a history of gradual bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, particularly of higher frequencies, is highly suggestive of presbycusis. Patients typically have a normal physical examination, as is the case here, and report that the symptoms are worse in noisy or crowded environments. Smoking is a risk factor for presbycusis.
Noise-induced hearing loss: As with presbycusis, noise-induced hearing loss is usually bilateral, sensorineural, and particularly affects the ability to hear higher frequencies. It occurs more commonly in people working in environments with chronic exposure to loud noises (> 85 dB) and insufficient ear protection. Patients typically report that the symptoms are worse in noisy or crowded environments and they also often develop tinnitus. Although this patient has a history of occupational noise exposure, which makes noise-induced hearing loss is likely, he does not have tinnitus and has a history of tobacco use that puts presbycusis slightly higher up on the list of differential diagnoses.
Medication-induced hearing loss: leads to sensorineural hearing loss that is also typically bilateral and affects higher frequencies. It often also leads to tinnitus and vertigo. This patient's exposure to ototoxic substances in the past (cisplatin 3 years ago) and present (aspirin for the past 6 months) puts him at risk for medication-induced hearing loss. However, his symptoms initially started 5 years ago, before he began treatment with cisplatin or aspirin, which makes medication-induced hearing loss the least likely of the differential diagnoses here. Since aspirin-induced hearing loss is usually reversible, he should be counseled to discontinue the agent.
Diagnostic studies
Audiometry: determines the extent of hearing loss; also helps to differentiate presbycusis from noise-induced hearing loss 
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Maximize table
Table Quiz
Conductive hearing loss	Sensorineural hearing loss
Outer ear	Middle ear	Inner ear
Trauma
Infection (e.g., external otitis)
Cerumen
Squamous cell carcinoma
Otosclerosis
Trauma (e.g., ruptured tympanic membrane, temporal bone fracture)
Infection (e.g., otitis media)
Cholesteatoma
Ménière disease
Age (Presbycusis)
Noise exposure
Autoimmune
Ototoxic drugs (e.g., cisplatin, aspirin, aminoglycosides)
Tumor (e.g., acustic neuroma)
Infection (e.g., meningitis, syphilis, Ramsay Hunt syndrome)
Hearing improves in noisy environments	Hearing becomes worse in noisy environments
Weber: lateralization to impaired ear
Rinne: negative (bone conduction > air conduction)
Weber: lateralization to good ear
Rinne: positive (air conduction > bone conduction)
For causes of hearing loss, remember the magic spell: COTICS MOTIC SIMANA OTI (Conductive hearing loss: Outer ear (Trauma, Infection, Cerumen, Squamous cell carcinoma), Middle ear (Otosclerosis, Trauma, Infection, Choleseatoma); Sensorineural hearing loss: Inner ear (Ménière disease, Age, Noise exposure, Autoimmune, Ototoxic drugs, Tumor, Infection).
See also the article on hearing loss.
Inner ear: organs of hearing and balance
Inner ear: organs of hearing and balance
Normal audiogram
Normal audiogram
Audiogram in presbycusis
Audiogram in presbycusis
Audiogram in noise-induced hearing loss
Audiogram in noise-induced hearing loss

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
