Case 25: Knee pain

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Ashley Stone, a 47-year-old female, comes to the physician's office because of pain in her right knee.
Vital signs
Temperature: 100.04°F (37.8°C)
Blood pressure: 115/80 mm Hg
Heart rate: 68/min
Respirations: 16/min
BMI: 32 kg/m2
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
You have a bandage around your right knee so that the skin is not visible. If the examinee asks you to remove it, do so.
When the examinee asks you to move your right lower leg, say that it hurts.
When the examinee presses your right calf, say that it hurts.
When the examinee presses on your right knee, say that it hurts on the right side (outside) of the knee.
When the examinee pushes your right foot toward your nose, say that it hurts.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., ultrasound) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: Ask “Do you think my condition is dangerous?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
I have pain in my knee.

Location
My right knee.

Intensity (on a scale from 0–10)
It is a 6.

Quality
It is a dull pain.

Onset
The pain started 3 days ago.

Precipitating events
I fell on my knee 3 days ago after slipping on the stairs at work. It hurt a lot, so I put on a bandage.

Other injuries sustained in the fall
I only have a few scratches on my hands, but nothing else.

Loss of consciousness 
No.

Progression/constant/intermittent
The pain is getting worse.

Previous episodes
Never.

Radiation
My whole calf hurts, too.

Alleviating factors
It does not hurt as much if I do not move my leg. And I took some ibuprofen, which helped.

Aggravating factors
Moving my leg and walking.

Associated symptoms
My calf has also felt swollen since yesterday evening. 
Review of systems specific to knee pain and leg pain and swelling

Recent travel 
Well, the day before I fell I was on the road all day visiting customers who were interested in buying artwork. But because my leg has been hurting so bad, I have not moved much for the past 2 days.

Fever/chills 
No.

Rash/skin changes 
I am not sure. I have this bandage on over my knee. But my calf is not red and I have not noticed a rash. 

Chest pain 
No.

Cough
No.

Shortness of breath
No.

Pain in joints 
Apart from the pain in my knee, no.

Urinary problems 
None.

Weight changes
Hmm, no. I know I am overweight, I have always had a hard time with my weight. 

Recent infections
No.

Dizziness
No.

Warmth of lower extremity 
No, I do not think so.

Weakness/numbness/tingling 
No.
In every case of suspected DVT, it is important to ask about possible signs of pulmonary embolism, including cough, dyspnea, chest pain, and dizziness.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
My cholesterol is a little high.

Thrombosis in the past 
No.

Allergies
None.

Medications
I take rosuvastatin. 

Hospitalizations
For the birth of my son.

Previous pregnancies/miscarriages 
None.

Past surgical history
No.

Family history 
My mother had a stroke when she was 60 years old. My father is healthy.

Work
I am an artist.

Home
I live with my husband and our son.

Alcohol
Sometimes I drink a glass of wine in the evening.

Recreational drugs
Never.

Tobacco 
I have smoked a pack a day for the past 20 years.

Exercise
Not really.

Diet
We order food a lot. I like Chinese and Mexican.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Cardiovascular examination 

Palpation of the radial pulse

Auscultation of the heart

Evaluation of JVD
Chest examination

Auscultation of the lungs
Extremities

Removal of the patient's bandage

Inspection of the lower extremities  

Examination for pitting edema 

Palpation of the lower extremities
Right calf tender to palpation
Lateral joint line tenderness of the right knee

Focused examination of passive and active motion of the lower extremities
Decreased ROM in the right knee due to pain

Lachman test 

Posterior drawer test 

Valgus stress test

Varus stress test

Focused examination of sensation of the lower extremities

Palpation of pedal pulses

Homan sign
Positive
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Pitting edema of lower leg
Pitting edema of lower leg
Lachman test
Lachman test
Drawer tests
Drawer tests
Lachman Test - Clinical Examination
Lachman Test - Clinical Examination
Drawer Test - Clinical Examination
Drawer Test - Clinical Examination

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee did not repeat painful maneuvers during physical examination.

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling on support options for weight and diet changes.

Examinee offered counseling on smoking cessation.

Examinee reapplied patient's bandage.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.
Suggested response to challenge: “Mrs. Stone, I can understand your concern. At this point in time, I don't know what exactly is causing your knee and calf pain. You could have a blood clot in one of the veins of your leg, or you might have hurt your knee or the muscles of your leg during your fall at work. I would like to run some tests and do some imaging of your knee and the blood vessels in your leg to determine what exactly is causing your symptoms and to make sure we give you the appropriate treatment. I can assure you we have a very experienced team at this hospital and will provide you with the best possible care. What do you think about that?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT): This patient's progressive calf pain, history of calf swelling following a lower extremity injury, and subsequent immobilization of the leg for 2 days should raise concern for DVT. This patient's positive Homan test, subfebrile temperature, and risk factors for DVT (smoking, obesity) support this diagnosis. Because the patient only has a score of 1 according to the Wells criteria for DVT (localized tenderness along the deep venous system), D-dimer levels should be evaluated and, if abnormal, followed up by compression ultrasound with Doppler. 
Gastrocnemius strain (muscle strain): Calf pain, possibly radiating to the knee, swelling, and a positive Homan sign (calf pain on dorsiflexion of the foot) are all also consistent with a gastrocnemius strain. However, the injury is usually associated with ecchymosis and usually occurs while jumping, rather than during a fall.
Lateral collateral ligament tear (LCL injury): Knee pain and tenderness over the lateral joint line of the knee following a fall are consistent with an LCL injury. Although the injury can cause mild pain in the lower leg, it would not sufficiently explain this patient's calf pain, swelling, or subfebrile temperature, making it the least likely differential diagnosis here. 
Diagnostic studies
D-dimer level: performed if Wells criteria for DVT < 2; normal levels rule out DVT; would likely be positive in this patient because of the recent lower extremity injury 
Compression ultrasonography with Doppler R leg: test of choice to diagnose DVT; in DVT, would show non-compressibility of the obstructed vein, visible hyperechoic mass, and absent/abnormal flow in Doppler imaging
Ultrasound R calf: to assess for a gastrocnemius tear and other muscular injuries
MRI R knee: to assess for associated soft tissue injuries (e.g., meniscus tear, cruciate ligament injuries); would show a collateral ligament rupture, although this is not typically required for diagnosis
X-ray R knee: to rule out a fracture and other associated injuries
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Ruptured baker cyst
Post-traumatic hematoma
Rhabdomyolysis
Acute compartment syndrome
Cellulitis
Septic arthritis
See also differential diagnoses of compartment syndrome.
Diagnostic approach to DVT
Diagnostic approach to DVT
Ligaments of the knee
Ligaments of the knee
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
