img1-Jaundice (icterus)

img2-Ascites
The abdomen is significantly enlarged due to ascites. Partially erosive, erythematous maculopapules are visible, consistent with prurigo simplex.

img3-Differential diagnosis of jaundice

img4-Classification of jaundice according to underlying disease and localization

img5-Extrahepatic biliary tree
The right and left hepatic ducts join to form the common hepatic duct. The cystic duct joins the common hepatic duct to form the common bile duct. The main pancreatic duct drains into the common bile duct. The common bile duct opens into the descending part of the duodenum.

img6-Bilirubin metabolism
(1) Hemoglobin is broken down into heme and globin in the spleen and, to a lesser extent, in the bone marrow.
(2) Macrophages break heme down into unconjugated bilirubin. Bound to albumin, unconjugated bilirubin is transported in the bloodstream and taken up by the liver.
(3) Bilirubin is conjugated in the liver and secreted in bile.
(4) In order to be secreted, conjugated bilirubin enters the blood to reach the hepatocytes with a direct connection to the bile canaliculi. At this stage, conjugated bilirubin is detectable in the blood.
(5) Bilirubin reaches the intestine via the bile. Intestinal bacteria convert bilirubin to urobilinogen.
(6) Most of the urobilinogen is converted into stercobilinogen and then stercobilin. Stercobilin is excreted via the stool, giving it its characteristic brown color.
(7) A smaller portion of urobilinogen is reabsorbed and follows two different paths:
→ (8) Most of it undergoes hepatobiliary recirculation, while the rest is filtrated in the kidney.
→ Or: (9) The remainder gets filtrated in the kidneys. in the urine, urobilinogen is oxidized to urobilin, which is responsible for the characteristic yellow color.

img7-Biliary ductal dilatation
Ultrasound liver (intercostal view; transverse plane)
The dilated common bile duct measures 12.8 mm in diameter and is larger in caliber than the portal vein (PV). Normal common bile duct diameter is generally reported as ≤ 7 mm, or ≤ 11 mm post cholecystectomy.
L: liver

img8- and img9-Intrahepatic bile ductal dilatation
Ultrasound liver (left lobe; transverse plane; color Doppler)
Multiple dilated intrahepatic bile ducts are seen (examples indicated by green overlay). Color Doppler (within green box) helps differentiate the portal vein branches (red Doppler signal) from bile ducts.
Normal intrahepatic bile ducts are approx. 2 mm in diameter and do not exceed 40% of the diameter of the accompanying portal vein.