img1-Rinne and Weber tuning fork tests
(1) Weber test: A vibrating tuning fork is placed on the center of the skull. The patient is then asked from which ear the sound is heard loudest. If the sound is louder in one ear, the Rinne test should be performed on both the right and left ears.
(2) The vibrating tuning fork is placed on the mastoid process of the ear, which can be located by palpating behind the ear canal.
(3) If the tone subsides to the extent that the patient can no longer hear it, the tuning fork is positioned in front of the same ear without vibrating it again. In normal hearing, the patient is able to hear the tuning fork, because air conduction is greater than bone conduction (Rinne test is positive). The Rinne and Weber tests can be used to differentiate between conductive and sensorineural hearing loss.

img2-Herpes zoster oticus
Multiple grouped vesicles filled with clear fluid are visible on the ear. The anterior aspect of the helix is partially crusted.
This is the typical appearance of herpes zoster oticus. The additional finding of unilateral facial nerve paralysis is diagnostic of Ramsay Hunt syndrome.

img3-Examination and surface anatomy of the tympanic membrane

img4-Healthy tympanic membrane
Otoscopic photography of the left tympanic membrane
The tympanic membrane is seen as a pearly gray, translucent ovoid disc at the end of the external auditory canal. It can be roughly divided into two parts: the small and flaccid pars flaccida (PF) and the larger and tauter pars tensa (PT) underneath. In the center, a protrusion called the “malleolar stria” is visible (green overlay). It is raised by the malleus process and the malleus handle. The tip of the hammer forms the umbo (yellow overlay). The anterior inferior quadrant shows the physiologic reflection of the otoscopic light, called the “cone of light” (blue overlay).

img5-Examination findings in facial nerve palsy
Symptoms in central facial palsy are caused by a contralateral upper motor neuron (UMN) lesion. Because muscles responsible for eyelid and forehead movements are innervated by upper motor neuron fibers from both hemispheres, their function is preserved in central facial palsy. In peripheral facial palsy, damage to lower motor neuron (LMN) fibers results in ipsilateral paralysis of all facial muscles. Because sensory and autonomic fibers join the lower motor neuron fibers of the facial nerve in its peripheral course, peripheral facial palsies can also manifest with non-motoric symptoms.