Case 27: Fatigue

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Lakeesha Willis, a 28-year-old female, comes to the doctor’s office because of fatigue.
Vital signs
Temperature: 97.5°F (36.4°C)
Blood pressure: 110/65 mm Hg
Heart rate: 60/min
Respirations: 15/min
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
Speak slowly and without very much emotion.
Keep your face expressionless, as it would be during sleep.
If the examinee tests the strength of your arms or legs by asking you to press against them, press back only weakly.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., MRI, CT) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: Ask “Do you think I am a bad mother?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
I have been really tired lately.

Onset
Maybe for 5 months now.

Constant/intermittent
All the time.

Precipitating events
Well, I gave birth to my twins 6 months ago.

Progression
It has been getting worse.

Previous episodes
No.

Alleviating factors
Nothing. Not even sleeping helps.

Aggravating factors
When the boys cry a lot and wake each other up all the time. Sometimes I just do not get any sleep for nights in a row.

Associated symptoms
I have been feeling really cold lately. I need to put on a sweater when nobody else does. 
Review of systems specific to fatigue with postpartum onset

Trauma 
No.

Headache
No.

Nausea/vomiting
No.

Fever/chills
No.

Racing of the heart
No.

Rash/skin changes 
No.

Shortness of breath 
No.

Urinary problems 
No.

Bowel problems 
No.

Sleep problems
I do not sleep much. I am up with one or the other of the twins at night a lot.

Appetite
I do not have much of an appetite.

Weight changes 
I have not been able to lose my baby weight yet.

Recent infections
No.

Dizziness
Sometimes I feel dizzy when I stand for a long time. Not often, though. 

Dry hair 
Maybe, I do not really get to use any hair products. I do not have time for things like that, with the twins and all.

Lactation 
I have not been able to breastfeed. I feed the twins formula.

Mood 
I have not really been happy the past few months. I am just so exhausted.

Loss of interest
I am too tired to do any of the fun things I used to do.

Guilt/low self-esteem
I know this should be the best time of my life with the children just being born, but I am just not happy.

Poor concentration 
I am trying my best, but I forget to do simple things all the time, like closing the cabinet doors or taking out the trash.

Psychomotor agitation or retardation 
No.

Suicidality 
No.

Social support
I live with my husband and the kids. He has been really supportive but he is gone all day because he works an hour away from home.

Intention to harm the children
No, I would never harm my children!
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
None.

Allergies
Cats.

Medications
None.

Hospitalizations
For the twins' birth and when I had my appendix removed as a child.

Past surgical history
I had my appendix taken out when I was about 10 years old.

Family history
My mom has bipolar disorder. 

Work
I am on maternity leave to stay home with the kids. I had planned on going back to my job as aerospace engineer already, but I just have not had the energy.

Alcohol
No, not since I found out I was pregnant.

Recreational drugs
No, never.

Tobacco
No.

Exercise 
No.

Diet
I do not have time to cook or much of an appetite, and my husband is gone most of the day, so I just snack on little things like chips and chocolate.
Sexual history, OB/Gyn

Sexually active
I have not really had sex with my husband since the birth of our children. I am just too tired.

Pain with intercourse 
I do not know. Not before I had the twins.

Libido 
I do not really feel like having sex.

Last menstrual period 
I have not had my period since before I was pregnant.

Menarche
When I was 12 years old.

Duration of period
About 3–4 days, before I got pregnant.

Period regular
Before I got pregnant, yes.

Pregnancies
Just with the twins.

Prenatal history
It was all normal. They were just born a litte early, at 37 weeks, 4 days.

Birth history
It was a normal delivery. The twins were still really small because they were early. And then I had to stay a little longer because there was a lot of bleeding after the delivery and they had to give me transfusions. 

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination

Inspection of the head 

Inspection of the conjunctivae 
Neck examination

Examination of the thyroid gland
Cardiovascular examination

Palpation of the radial pulse 

Auscultation of the heart
Extremities

Inspection of the lower extremities 

Skin examination 
Neurologic examination

Examination of orientation to person, place, and time

Focused mental status examination
Flat affect

Focused examination of passive and active motion 
Decreased strength of the arms and legs bilaterally when pushing against the examinee

Focused examination of deep tendon reflexes 
Examination of the Thyroid - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Thyroid - Clinical Examination

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling on lifestyle modifications to improve mood.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.
Suggested response to challenge: ”Mrs. Willis, I understand that you have been under a great deal of stress and are feeling exhausted. I think the fact that you came in to see me today because you are concerned about doing a good job caring for your children shows me that you are a good mother and that you are trying to make sure your children get the best possible care. I would like to run a few more tests to find out what is causing your symptoms. Once we have done that, we can make sure that you get the best possible treatment. If you like, I can also get you in touch with one of our social workers and you can talk to her about ways to support you and your family. How does that sound?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Sheehan syndrome: This patient presents with symptoms of deficiency of several pituitary hormones. She has symptoms of hypothyroidism (fatigue, cold intolerance, reduced appetite, lack of postpartum weight loss), gonadotropin deficiency (loss of libido, no menses since pregnancy despite bottle-feeding), prolactin deficiency (lactation failure), and ACTH deficiency (weakness, low blood pressure). Together with her history of postpartum hemorrhage requiring transfusions, such a constellation of findings makes it very likely that she is suffering from hypopituitarism due to Sheehan syndrome.
Postpartum depression: This patient has several symptoms that should raise concern for postpartum depression, including fatigue, depressed mood, loss of interest, feelings of guilt, low energy, poor concentration, poor appetite, and loss of libido. Her family history of psychiatric illness predisposes her to postpartum depression as well. However, her secondary amenorrhea, lactation failure, cold intolerance, muscle weakness, and low blood pressure are physiological findings that are more consistent with a hormone imbalance.
Iron deficiency anemia: After postpartum hemorrhage, especially if transfusions have been required, anemia can be profound and iron stores can become very depleted. This patient has a poor diet and is not taking any iron supplements; her fatigue, poor concentration, and dizziness could indeed be due in part to iron deficiency anemia. However, her symptoms of hypopituitarism should be addressed first.
Diagnostic studies
Serum cortisol, ACTH: tests for ACTH deficiency 
Estradiol, FSH, LH: tests for gonadotropin deficiency
IGF-1: test for growth hormone deficiency
TSH: to test for hypothyroidism
CBC, MCV, MCH: Low hemoglobin is a criterion for anemia. Hypochromic, microcytic anemia would suggest iron deficiency anemia. 
Serum electrolytes, glucose: Hypoglycemia and hyponatremia are symptoms of ACTH deficiency.
MRI brain: imaging modality of choice in Sheehan syndrome, although imaging would likely only follow hormone studies if they are abnormal
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Postpartum thyroiditis (subacute lymphocytic thyroiditis)
Pituitary adenoma
Adrenal insufficiency
Hypothalamic-pituitary hormone axis
Hypothalamic-pituitary hormone axis
Diagnosis of anemia
Diagnosis of anemia

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
