img1-Murphy's sign
(1) The examiner positions their hands in the RUQ underneath the right costal arch, while the patient exhales.
(2) During inspiration both the liver and the gallbladder are pushed down towards the examiner's hand. If the patient experiences pain and therefore stops inspiration, the Murphy's sign is positive.
A positive Murphy's sign may indicate acute cholecystitis.

img2-Tumefactive biliary sludge
Ultrasound right upper quadrant (oblique plane)
A lobulated heterogeneous mass with low echogenicity (green hatched overlay) in the dependent portion of the dilated common bile duct (12.1 mm, green overlay) does not produce acoustic shadowing. The intrahepatic bile ducts are not dilated.
Tumefactive sludge can simulate a biliary tumor. A lack of blood flow within sludge on color Doppler can sometimes help to distinguish sludge from tumor.
L: liver; blue overlay: portal vein

img3-Gallbladder calculi and wall thickening
Ultrasound gallbladder (longitudinal plane)
Acoustic enhancement (green overlay) is seen distal to the gallbladder except where multiple small dependent hyperechoic calculi (yellow overlay) reflect the ultrasound beam and cast an acoustic shadow (green hatched overlay). Biliary sludge (yellow hatched overlay) is slightly hyperechoic compared to anechoic bile. The gallbladder wall is thickened (normal size: 1–2 mm) and has a layered appearance (red overlay), with central hypoechoic edema.
These findings in a patient with typical clinical features of RUQ pain strongly indicate acute calculous cholecystitis. Additional findings that would support a diagnosis of cholecystitis include an obstructing calculus, positive Murphy sign, pericholecystic fluid, gallbladder dilatation, and hyperemia of the gallbladder wall on color Doppler.
G: gallbladder; L: liver

img4-Acute pancreatitis
CT abdomen (with contrast; axial plane) of a patient with acute biliary pancreatitis
Fatty and fascial stranding (yellow overlay) anterior to the pancreas (P) indicates peripancreatic inflammation. The gallbladder (yellow outline) contains calculi (examples indicated by red overlay) and sludge. In addition, the common bile duct (green overlay) is slightly dilated.
The passage of a gallbladder calculus through the common bile duct can result in acute pancreatitis.
A: aorta; Vc: ascending vena cava; L: liver; Sp: spleen; Red arrow: hepatic artery; Green outline: stomach

img5-Endoscopic view of the major duodenal papilla
The major duodenal papilla refers to the opening of the ampulla of Vater (where the common bile duct and the pancreatic duct come together) into the 2nd part of the duodenum. The opening is surrounded by the sphincter of Oddi. During an endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), the major duodenal papilla is used to gain access to the bile system; injection of contrast medium into the ampulla of Vater allows visualization of the pancreatic duct and biliary tree.