img1-Vertebral fractures due to osteoporosis
Schematic representation of typical osteoporotic vertebral fractures: codfish, wedge-shaped, and compressed vertebra. Vertebral fractures may reduce the height of the spine, which leads to typical transverse, triangular skin folds.

img2-Straight leg raise tests

img3-Dermatome map
Schematic representation of the body's dermatomes (i.e., areas of skin that are innervated by a single sensory spinal root)
Note: Nearly all dermatome maps refer to publications by Head and Campbell (1900), Foerster (1933), or Keegan and Garrett (1948), which differ significantly in some areas. After careful review of the current literature, this illustration has been based on Keegan and Garrett's work, as it is most likely to be based on valid methodology and correlates with established clinical findings.

img4-Degenerative and inflammatory lesions of the spine
Degenerative lesions result from wear and tear and are associated with older age. Inflammatory lesions occur in diseases such as ankylosing spondylitis and psoriasis.
If there is subchondral erosion or destruction of the vertebral body, consider bacterial infection or a tumor as possible etiologies.

img5-Thoracic wedge compression fracture
X-ray thoracic spine (lateral view) of a patient with osteoporosis
There is an insufficiency fracture of the T7 vertebral body, which is anteriorly wedged (green overlay) and accompanied by anterior subluxation (arrow) of the T6 vertebral body.
Wedge compression deformities are frequently osteoporotic, although alternatively may be pathologic (secondary to a focal bone lesion) or traumatic.
Red dashed outlines: normal vertebrae

img6-Degenerative disk disease with disk extrusion
MRI lumbar spine (T2-weighted; sagittal plane)
Hypointense degenerated disks (red overlay) at L4–5 and L5–S1 are accompanied by disk space narrowing. A disk extrusion (white dashed outline) at L4–5 has migrated superiorly behind the L4 vertebral body and narrows the thecal sac (arrowhead).

img7-Burst fracture of T12 vertebral body
CT thoracic spine (T12 level; left: sagittal plane; right: axial plane; bone window)
A compression fracture of the superior endplate (red overlay and lines) is accompanied by cortical disruption and retropulsion (arrow) into the spinal canal.
Burst fractures result from high-energy axial compression forces accompanied by varying degrees of flexion and/or rotation. They can be stable or unstable fractures.

img8-Acute and chronic vertebral fractures
MRI lumbar spine (left: STIR image; right: T1-weighted; sagittal plane)
Compression deformities of the T8, T10, and L4 vertebrae (green overlays) are visible. The T8 and T10 fractures are hyperintense on the STIR image, indicating that they are recent. The compressed superior endplate of L4 is iso- to hypointense, indicating an old or chronic deformity. The hypointense appearance of the L2–3 intervertebral disc (green circle) on the STIR image indicates disc degeneration.