img1-Straight leg raise tests

img2-Sacroiliac joint pain provocation tests (Mennell test)
The Mennell test can be performed in three different positions:
1. Prone position: Lift the leg passively (i.e., extend the hip) with one hand while applying pressure on the sacroiliac joint with the other hand.
2. Lateral position: Ask the patient to flex their lower hip and knee to ∼ 90°. Lift the upper leg and extend the upper hip with one hand while fixing the pelvis with the other hand.
3. Supine position: Apply posteriorly directed pressure to the anterior superior iliac spines.
These maneuvers should not cause pain in a healthy individual. Pain in the area of the sacroiliac joint is referred to as the Mennell sign.

img3-Psoriasis capitis
Silver-white scaling and plaques are visible on the scalp and forehead parallel to the hairline.
This is the characteristic appearance of psoriasis capitis.

img4-Plaque psoriasis
Multiple sharply demarcated confluent plaques covered with hard, coarse, silver-white scaling are visible over the extensor surface of the knee.
This is the characteristic appearance of plaque psoriasis.

img5-Nail pitting in psoriasis
Multiple, small round depressions are seen in the nails.
This appearance is caused by the presence of parakeratotic cells (cells with impaired keratinization) in the nail matrix. Over time, these cells grow into the nail plate from the nail matrix, where they erupt from the horny layer, leaving small visible depressions.

img6-Dactylitis
The entire left index finger of this patient with psoriatic arthritis is swollen.
This appearance is typical of dactylitis, which can be caused by a variety of conditions, including spondyloarthropathies, infections, and sickle cell disease.

img7-Bamboo spine and dagger sign in ankylosing spondylitis
X-ray lumbar spine (AP view)
Marginal syndesmophytes formed by ossification of outer fibers of the annulus fibrosis have caused the spine to resemble a bamboo stem (so-called “bamboo spine”; red outlines).
Additional ossification of supraspinous and interspinous ligaments has produced a dense line (dagger sign; green overlay) projecting through the vertebrae. Fusion (ankylosis) across the sacroiliac joints (indicated by arrowheads) can also be seen.

img8-Psoriatic arthritis
Anteroposterior x-ray of the lumbar spine:
1. Syndesmophytes: e.g., between L3 and L4 (example shown on the left).
2. Parasyndesmophytes : e.g., right lateral of L2–L3

img9-Sacroiliitis
X-ray lumbar spine (AP view; supine position) of a patient with ankylosing spondylitis
Characteristic findings of sacroiliitis are visible on the sacroiliac joints, including extensive periarticular sclerosis (green overlay) and erosions (example indicated by red overlay).

img10-Psoriatic arthritis
X-ray hands (PA view)
Asymmetric advanced arthritis involves the left hand, with ankylosis of several proximal and distal interphalangeal (PIP and DIP) joints (examples indicated by green overlay) along with multiple flexion deformities. Marginal erosions are present at the bases of the small finger proximal phalanx and thumb distal phalanx (red overlay). Central subchondral erosions and proliferative changes with a gull-wing deformity are seen at the right ring finger DIP joint.
Also shown is an illustration of a pencil-in-cup deformity (not present here), which can occur in psoriatic arthritis and several other inflammatory arthritides.
Advanced degenerative changes additionally involve multiple left carpal and metacarpal joints.

img11-Degenerative and inflammatory lesions of the spine
Degenerative lesions result from wear and tear and are associated with older age. Inflammatory lesions occur in diseases such as ankylosing spondylitis and psoriasis.
If there is subchondral erosion or destruction of the vertebral body, consider bacterial infection or a tumor as possible etiologies.