img1-Hyperintense lesions in cerebellar infarction
MRI head (T2-weighted FLAIR; coronal plane) of a patient with polycythemia vera
Small hyperintense lesions (green overlays) in the left cerebellum (Ce; green outline) not associated with mass effect are compatible with infarction.

img2-Cerebral metastasis in lung carcinoma 2/2
MRI head (T2-weighted; without contrast; axial plane) of a patient with lung carcinoma
A solitary, well-circumscribed, predominantly hyperintense mass (hatched overlay) in the left occipital lobe is accompanied by perifocal edema (green overlay).
The lesion is consistent with a cerebral metastasis.

img3-Bilateral glioblastoma (butterfly glioma)
T1-weighted contrast-enhanced MRI, frontal view: bihemisphere garland-like contrast enhancement. There is peripheral contrast agent enhancement with central necrosis. The third ventricle is centrally located. The tumor is displacing the posterior horn of the lateral ventricle. Diagnosis: bilateral glioblastoma (butterfly glioma).

img4-Large left hemispheric cerebral infarct
CT head (without contrast; axial plane)
Diffuse hypodensity (green overlay) involving the left anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral artery distributions is accompanied by sulcal effacement and a loss of gray-white matter differentiation. There is mild mass effect on the falx cerebri (blue line) and left lateral ventricle (red overlay).

img5-Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Lateral view

img6-Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Sagittal section

img7-Arterial supply of the cerebral cortex
Axial section; ventral view

img8-Circle of Willis
The circle of Willis is depicted in light red with the main arteries of the brain in dark red.

img9-Lateral view of important areas of the brain
The primary motor cortex, in the frontal lobe, is the origin of the fibers of the pyramidal tract.
The primary and secondary auditory cortices, where auditory input is processed, are located in the temporal lobe. The primary visual cortex is located at the occipital pole and is surrounded by the secondary visual cortex.
Different functions converge at association areas. The most well-known examples are the motor (Broca) and sensory (Wernicke) areas of speech, which are commonly located in the dominant hemisphere.

img10-Cortical homunculi
The cortical homunculi show the somatotopic arrangement of the different parts of the body in the cortex.
Note that the relative share of cortex dedicated to the various limbs and organs is not the same for the primary motor cortex (left) and primary somatosensory cortex (right). Almost all of these cortical areas are supplied by the medial cerebral artery (MCA) and its branches. Only the area near the parasagittal cortical zone is supplied by the anterior cerebral artery (ACA) and its branches (red area).

img11-Management of stroke