Case 5: Nausea

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Sophia Benedikt, a 19-year-old female, comes to the physician's office because of nausea.
Vital signs
Temperature: 98.6°F (37°C)
Blood pressure: 122/68 mm Hg
Heart rate: 75/min
Respirations: 16/min
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
You think doctors are overrated and do not really believe the conclusions the examinee reaches about your condition.
When the examinee presses on the right and left lower parts of your abdomen, say that it hurts a little bit.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., ultrasound) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: If the examinee says you may be pregnant, act upset and say that it is not possible.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over or clicking on the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form or the abbreviation list will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
I just feel sick to my stomach all time.

Vomiting
I have to throw up 1–2 times most days.

Color
It happens more when my stomach is empty, so it is usually clear.

Blood
No.

Onset
It has been going on for 10 days or so.

Constant/intermittent
It is worst in the morning, but I would say I feel pretty consistently bad all day.

Precipitating events
None.

Progression
I think it is getting worse.

Previous episodes
No never.

Alleviating factors
It actually helps if I eat a little something when I feel the sickness coming on. Is that not strange?

Aggravating factors
Strong smells seem to make it worse.

Associated symptoms
Yes actually, now that you ask. I have had to pee all the time for the last 1–2 weeks and really suddenly sometimes. 

Urinary discomfort 
No.
Review of systems specific to nausea and increased urinary frequency

Recent travel 
No.

Swelling of the ankles 
What? No.

Fever/chills
No.

Fatigue
Yes, I have been really tired.

Rash/skin changes 
No.

Pain in joints 
No.

Bowel problems
No.

Appetite
I have no appetite, but if I eat, I feel better. The only thing I have really been craving for some reason are bananas. 

Weight changes 
I am not sure. I do not have a scale, but I feel bloated.

Recent infections
No.

Abdominal pain
Hmm, my stomach has been hurting a little for the past 4–5 days. It is almost like menstrual cramps, but I am not on my period.

Back pain 
No.

Breast enlargement/tenderness 
I wish.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
None.

Allergies
I cannot wear jewelry with nickel in it because it gives me a bad rash.

Medications
None.

Hospitalizations
No.

Ill contacts
My roommate got really sick to her stomach 3 weeks ago for about 2 days. I probably have what she had.

Past surgical history 
None.

Family history
My parents are both fine. My little sister has Down syndrome.

Work
I am getting my bachelor's in mathematics.

Home
I live in an apartment with a roommate.

Alcohol
I do not like to drink. Alcohol always gives me a bad headache.

Recreational drugs
No, I think that stuff is stupid.

Tobacco
No.

Diet
I mostly eat in the cafeteria at my school.
Sexual history, OB/Gyn

Sexually active
Yes.

With whom
My boyfriend.

Men or women
Men.

Number of partners over the past year
Five.

Protection
Sometimes. But I have a contraceptive implant so it does not really matter.

When was the implant placed
About 4 years ago or so. 

History of sexually transmitted infection 
No.

Pain during sex 
Hmm, a little last time I had sex.

Last menstrual period 
I would say about 6 weeks ago? Maybe a little longer.

Menarche
When I was 12 years old.

Duration of period
2–3 days.

Period regular
Yes. Usually every 4 weeks, but I guess this time it is not as regular.

How many tampons per day
I use pads. But maybe 3 of those?

Vaginal discharge 
A little more than the usual amount lately. But it is the same color still.

Vaginal itching
No.

Pregnancies
Never!
Always evaluate for genitourinary causes of nausea/vomiting in sexually active patients.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Back examination

Examination for costovertebral angle tenderness 
Cardiovascular examination

Auscultation of the heart
Chest examination

Auscultation of the lungs
Abdominal examination

Inspection of the abdomen

Auscultation of the abdomen

Percussion of the abdomen

Palpation of the abdomen
Mild tenderness to palpation in the right and left lower quadrant

Signs of appendicitis

Skin examination 
Examination of the Abdomen - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Abdomen - Clinical Examination

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee did not repeat painful maneuvers during physical examination

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling on safer sex practices.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.
Suggested response to challenge: “Ms. Benedikt, I understand your shock and surprise at being told that you might be pregnant. I can see that it is not something you expected to hear. Since it is only one of several possible explanations for your symptoms, let's run a few tests first before jumping to conclusions and then look at the results together. I can assure you that no matter what the results are I will be with you to decide what steps to take.”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Normal pregnancy: Although this patient has a contraceptive implant, her history of unprotected sexual intercourse and last menstrual period 6 weeks ago (with an otherwise regular 4-week cycle in the past), as well as the implant placement that occurred 4 years ago, should raise suspicion of pregnancy. Her symptoms of morning sickness (nausea and vomiting that is worst in the morning), increased urinary frequency, cravings for specific foods, fatigue, and feeling bloated are all consistent with the diagnosis. Although pelvic pain is not a typical sign of a pregnancy, mild pain can occur. Her otherwise stable vitals and normal physical examination make a normal pregnancy the most likely diagnosis in this case.
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID): A history of unprotected sexual intercourse with multiple sexual partners put this patient at risk for sexually transmitted infections. Nausea and vomiting, increased urinary frequency, urgency, dyspareunia, increased vaginal discharge, and pelvic pain are all consistent with PID. Bilateral lower abdominal or pelvic tenderness further support this diagnosis. However, the fact that this patient has had nausea and vomiting for an extended period as well as the lack of fever or more pronounced abdominal pain make PID only the second differential diagnosis.
Ectopic pregnancy: The symptoms of an ectopic pregnancy are usually similar to those of an early pregnancy and therefore consistent with this case. Although lower abdominal pain or pelvic pain is seen in ectopic pregnancies, the pain is usually unilateral and limited to the side of the ectopic pregnancy. Although this patient does have a contraceptive implant, which increases the risk of ectopic pregnancy slightly, she does not have any other risk factors for ectopic pregnancy, such as a history of PID, endometriosis, or past surgeries involving the fallopian tubes, making it the least likely of the three differential diagnoses.
Diagnostic studies
Pelvic exam: mandatory in all female patients with gynecological complaints 
Cervical and urethral swab for gonococcal and chlamydial DNA (PCR) and cultures: confirms the most likely causative organisms for PID
Urinalysis: to rule out a urinary tract infection
Abdominal ultrasound: to assess for a normal and ectopic pregnancy and other causes of lower abdominal pain (i.e., abscess, appendicitis) 
Transvaginal ultrasound: to assess for a normal and ectopic pregnancy 
Serum β-hCG: can detect a pregnancy 6–9 days (on average) after fertilization and has a higher sensitivity than urine β-hCG testing
CBC, ESR, electrolytes: Leukocytosis and an elevated ESR may indicate an infectious cause. The patient also has recurrent vomiting, which means that electrolyte disturbances should be ruled out.
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Urinary tract infection
Cervicitis
Appendicitis
Hyperemesis gravidarum 
See also differential diagnoses of pelvic inflammatory disease.
Cervical discharge in gonorrhea (speculum view)
Cervical discharge in gonorrhea (speculum view)
First trimester ultrasound, double sac sign
First trimester ultrasound, double sac sign
Tubal ring sign (blob sign) of ectopic pregnancy
Tubal ring sign (blob sign) of ectopic pregnancy

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
