Case 30: Sore throat

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Alex Soto, a 19-year-old male, comes to the urgent care clinic because of a sore throat.
Vital signs
Temperature: 102°F (38.9°C)
Blood pressure: 122/74 mm Hg
Heart rate: 70/min
Respirations: 15/min
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
Speak with a hoarse voice.
When the examinee feels for lymph nodes in your neck, say that it hurts.
When the examinee presses on your abdomen, say that it hurts a little bit all over.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., laryngoscopy) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: When the examinee mentions that she/he would like to run some tests, say: “Can you not just give me some antibiotics? I really want to get out of here.”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
I have a really sore throat.

Location
It is mostly the back of my throat.

Intensity (on a scale from 0–10)
I would say at least a 7, maybe an 8. 

Quality
It is almost a burning pain.

Onset
It started last night.

Precipitating events
None.

Progression/constant/intermittent
I think it is getting worse.

Previous episodes
Maybe as a child. But nothing recently.

Radiation
No.

Alleviating factors
Cold drinks really help.

Aggravating factors
It hurts more when I swallow.

Associated symptoms 
I also woke up with a really hoarse voice this morning.

Previous episodes of hoarse voice
No.

Problems swallowing food
Yes, it really hurts to eat or swallow so I have not really had anything to eat since yesterday. 

Able to swallow liquids 
No, I have no problem getting liquids down – but it is really painful.
Review of systems specific to sore throat

Headache 
No.

Nausea/vomiting
Yes, my throat is so swollen that I really feel a bit nauseous when I talk. But I have not thrown up.

Fever/chills
I think so. I definitely had chills yesterday in the evening. Did the nurse not take my temperature when I got here?

Fatigue
Yes, I was tired all day yesterday and today.

Rash/skin changes 
No.

Cough 
No.

Shortness of breath 
No.

Appetite
I do not have much of an appetite right now.

Weight changes
No.

Recent infections
I had a cold 2 weeks ago.

Runny nose
No.

Swollen lymph nodes 
No, not that I have noticed.

Voice changes
Well I am really hoarse.

Halitosis
Hmm, not sure but I have kind of a gross taste in my mouth and I feel like it smells.

Abdominal pain 
My whole belly has been hurting a little bit all day today. But it is very mild.
It is important to ask for symptoms of a common cold (rhinitis and/or headache) in patients who present with sore throat, as they are typical for viral tonsillitis but would not be expected in streptococcal pharyngitis.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
None.

Allergies
None.

Medications
None.

Hospitalizations
Never.

Ill contacts
My girlfriend says she has also had a sore throat for the past couple of weeks. 

Past surgical history
None.

Family history
My dad has diabetes.

Work
I go to college and am majoring in criminal justice, but mostly I am interested in playing football for the college team.

Home
I live in a dorm on campus.

Alcohol
I drink 1–2 beers on the weekends. During the week I always have football practice, so I do not have time to go out or drink.

Recreational drugs
No.

Tobacco
Never.

Exercise 
Football practice almost every day.
Sexual history

Sexually active
Yes.

With whom
Well, for the past 2 months, my girlfriend. And before that just a few different girls around campus.

Men or women
What kind of a question is that? Only women.

Number of partners over the past year
Dude, you are asking quite a few questions about this. Maybe 9? 10?

Protection
Yes, I always use a condom. The last thing I need is to get one of these girls pregnant.
Obtaining a focused sexual history is important in patients presenting with a sore throat. Unprotected sex is a risk factor for HIV, and an acute HIV infection can present with sore throat (mononucleosis-like syndrome).

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination

Inspection of the head

Palpation of the head

Inspection of the nose

Inspection of the oropharynx
Show the examinee this image of your throat: 
Neck examination

Inspection of the neck

Palpation of the lymph nodes of the head and neck
Tenderness to palpation 
Chest examination

Auscultation of the lungs
Abdominal examination 

Inspection of the abdomen

Auscultation of the abdomen

Percussion of the abdomen

Palpation of the abdomen
Mild tenderness to palpation throughout the entire abdomen 

Palpation of the liver

Palpation of the spleen

Skin examination 
Acute tonsillopharyngitis
Acute tonsillopharyngitis
Examination of the Liver - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Liver - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Spleen - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Spleen - Clinical Examination

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee did not repeat painful maneuvers during physical examination.

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling on avoidance of contact sports in suspected mononucleosis.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.
Suggested response to challenge: “Mr. Soto, I understand that you are not feeling well and that you would like to get back home as quickly as possible. However, at this time I cannot say with certainty whether your symptoms are caused by a bacterial or viral infection. Antibiotics would only be appropriate if bacteria were causing your symptoms, and otherwise they could do more harm than good, or even cause a rash. I would like to run some tests to figure out the exact cause of your symptoms and then discuss the appropriate treatment with you. Does that sound okay?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Streptococcal tonsillopharyngitis: This patient's sudden-onset sore throat, tender cervical lymphadenopathy, fever, and lack of cough or other symptoms of cold meet the criteria for microbiologic testing for group A streptococcal (GAS) pharyngitis. Although tonsillar exudates are often found in streptococcal tonsillopharyngitis, they are not always present, and the palatal petechiae seen in this patient are also a typical feature of strep throat. If he is found positive, he should be treated with antibiotics to prevent rheumatic fever and poststreptococcal glomerulonephritis. 
Infectious mononucleosis (IM): IM can present similarly to bacterial pharyngitis (e.g., sore throat, lymphadenopathy, fever, fatigue) and is common in young adults. It is of particular concern in this case because of the patient's mild abdominal pain, which could indicate splenomegaly, a common finding in IM. Since splenomegaly can lead to life-threatening splenic rupture and this patient is an avid football player, he should be discouraged from playing until his IM has subsided. However, because he does not have generalized lymphadenopathy or the grayish-white deposits on the tonsils typically seen in IM, it is only the second most likely diagnosis. 
Viral pharyngitis: Viral pharyngitis could also be the cause of this patient's sore throat and erythematous oropharynx. However, his fever and lack of symptoms of cold make this diagnosis less likely than the first two. 
Diagnostic studies
Rapid strep test: throat swab allows for simple and quick detection of group A streptococcal infection (highly specific, sensitivity 70–90%). In cases in which rapid strep testing is negative, throat culture can be used as a follow-up test.
CBC: Not specific, but can help differentiate viral from bacterial infections. Leukocytosis is generally more common in bacterial pharyngitis, whereas lymphocytosis is more common in viral pharyngitis and infectious mononucleosis.
Peripheral blood smear: Atypical T lymphocytes can be observed on peripheral smear in infectious mononucleosis.
Monospot test: can be used to support the diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis. Carries a high risk of false negative and false positive results.
EBV serology: most reliable laboratory study to diagnose infectious mononucleosis. Anti-VCA IgM alone is sufficient to diagnose acute infection.
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Upper respiratory infection (URTI)
Laryngitis
See also differential diagnosis of tonsillitis.
Acute tonsillopharyngitis
Acute tonsillopharyngitis
Exudative tonsillopharyngitis
Exudative tonsillopharyngitis
Acute pharyngitis
Acute pharyngitis

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
