img1-Normal range of shoulder abduction and pain in impingement
The normal range of motion is shown as a green semicircle. The angle range, in which impingement results in pain (painful arc), is indicated in red.

img2-Palpation techniques of the shoulder
(A) Palpation and joint laxity testing of the sternoclavicular joint (the examiner assesses for pain or strong movement by holding the clavicle between thumb and index finger of one hand and palpating the manubrium with the other)
(B) Palpation of the clavicle and acromioclavicular joint
(C) Palpation of the coracoid process in the infraclavicular fossa (confirm correct palpation by flexion/abduction of the upper arm, which causes movement of the coracoid process under the palpating finger)
(D) Palpation of the greater tubercle of the humerus (can be palpated as a movable protuberance upon internal and external rotation of the arm).

img3-Dorsal palpation of the scapula
Palpation from: the spine of the scapula (A), the medial border of the scapula (B), the inferior angle of the scapula (C), and lateral border of the scapula (D).

img4-Jobe test
In Jobe test, the examiner applies downward pressure (red arrow) onto the abducted, horizontally flexed, and internally rotated arm of the patient. The patient is asked to resist the downward pressure (green arrow). The supraspinatus muscle, in particular, is required to maintain the arm's position. If there is pain or if the patient is unable to maintain this position against resistance exerted by the examiner, this indicates a functional disorder of the supraspinatus muscle (e.g., rupture, tendinopathy, or subacromial bursitis). If an impairment is present, Jobe's test is considered positive.

img5-Rotator cuff tear
The top image shows a cross-section of the shoulder joint.
The bottom images show the progression of a degenerative rotator cuff tear. Repetitive overhead movement and/or anatomical variants of the acromion can result in inflammation of the subacromial bursa and rotator cuff tendons (left). This may progress to degeneration of the bursa and tendons (middle). As a result, the tendon fibers are less elastic and prone to tear, resulting in a rotator cuff tear (right). The supraspinatus tendon is most commonly affected.

img6-Rotator cuff muscles and their function

img7-Subacromial impingement syndrome
The upper images shows the sectional plane and anatomy of the frontal cross-section of the shoulder. The lower images show the stages of impingement.
Stage 1, which is very painful, is characterized by irritation of the rotator cuff and bursa. Stage 2 involves fibrosis of the structures, leading to restricted function. Stage 3 involves the painful rupture of the rotator cuff, intermittent bursitis, and pseudoparalysis of the arm.

img8-Frozen shoulder
Frontal cross-section of the shoulder and the three stages of frozen shoulder
Stage 1 (freezing stage): minimal synovitis with pain and limitation of motion
Stage 2 (frozen stage): proliferative synovitis with contraction of the capsule and adhesion of the axillary recess
Stage 3 (thawing stage): contracted capsule following the end of inflammation