img1-Brudzinski sign
Passive flexion of the neck (A) leads to spontaneous flexion of the hips (B) as a reflex, which provides relief of painful strain on the meninges.

img2-Kernig sign
The Kernig sign can be assessed using two methods. In the first method (A), the extended leg is passively elevated at the hip joint. If there is pain, there is reflex flexion of the knee. Alternatively (B), the Kernig sign can be assessed by flexing the hip and knee at a 90° angle. Subsequent extension of the leg causes stretching of the nerve roots or meninges, which can result in pain and muscle guarding against extension.

img3-Subarachnoid hemorrhage
A subarachnoid hemorrhage is most commonly caused by the rupture of a cerebral aneurysm.

img4-Basal ganglia hemorrhage
Hemorrhage in the region of the left basal ganglia causing a midline shift to the right
The basal ganglia are supplied by the lenticulostriate arteries, which arise from the middle cerebral artery. Hemorrhage from a lenticulostriate artery (e.g., due to poorly controlled hypertension or rupture of a Charcot-Bouchard microaneurysm) leads to a basal ganglia hemorrhage.

img5- and img6-Subarachnoid hemorrhage
CT head (without contrast; axial plane; superior to inferior images: caudal to cranial sections of the brain)
Increased attenuation in the basal cisterns (green overlay) and Sylvian fissures (blue overlay) indicates extensive subarachnoid hemorrhage. The location of a focal rounded area (red overlay) of hemorrhage adjacent to the left cerebral peduncle suggests a possible aneurysm of the posterior communicating or posterior cerebral artery. Mild symmetric ventricular dilatation and physiological falx cerebri calcification (yellow overlay) can also be seen.

img7- and img8-Subarachnoid hemorrhage
CT head (without contrast; axial plane)
Regions of high attenuation (green overlay) in the interpeduncular cistern, Sylvian fissures, and left posterior fossa represent acute subarachnoid hemorrhage. The cerebellar tentorium (red overlay) should not be misinterpreted as blood.

img9-Ruptured middle cerebral artery aneurysm
CT head (without contrast; axial plane)
A rounded area of high attenuation (1) in the left frontoparietal region indicates intracerebral hemorrhage from a ruptured left middle cerebral artery aneurysm. Extensive subarachnoid hemorrhage is present in the basal cisterns (2), interhemispheric fissure (3), right Sylvian fissure (4), left frontal lobe fissures (5), and posterior fossa (6). Ventricular dilatation (green overlay) is the result of obstruction of CSF drainage.

img10-Subarachnoid hemorrhage
CT head (without contrast; axial plane)
Multiple areas of high attenuation in the basal cisterns, Sylvian fissures, and sulci (examples indicated by green overlay) are characteristic of extensive subarachnoid hemorrhage.

img11-Intracerebral, intraventricular, and subarachnoid hemorrhage
CT head (without contrast; axial plane)
Left temporal lobe hemorrhage (red hatched overlay) has extended into the subarachnoid space (red overlay) and ventricular system (green hatched overlay). Impairment of cerebrospinal fluid circulation has resulted in ventricular dilatation and periventricular edema (green overlay).
1 = internal capsule; 2 = lentiform nucleus

img12-Subarachnoid hemorrhage
CT head (without contrast; axial plane)
A region of high attenuation (green overlay) along the interhemispheric fissure represents acute subarachnoid hemorrhage. A structure of greater hyperdensity in the right lateral ventricle is calcification of the choroid plexus.

img13- and img14-Traumatic intracerebral hemorrhage
CT head (axial section; without IV contrast: brain window)
There are multiple intraparenchymal hyperdensities (green overlay) in the left frontotemporal lobes and right frontal lobe, indicating multiple intracerebral hemorrhages. Hyperdensities (green lines) in the interhemispheric region and the interpeduncular region of the basal cistern are identifiable. These are consistent with a subarachnoid hemorrhage. A fracture line (green arrow) is visible in the right frontal bone and pneumocehalus, visualized as hypodense air (circled) within the soft tissue overlying the fracture segment, indicates an open fracture. The extracranial hyperdense region in the anterolateral aspects of the scalp indicates a large subgaleal hemorrhage (hatched green overlay).

img15- and img16-Intracerebral hematoma
CT head (without contrast; axial plane)
A large hyperdense hematoma (green overlay) in the posterior aspect of the left cerebral hemisphere is accompanied by hypodense edema (red overlay), effacement of the occipital horn of the left lateral ventricle, and midline shift (dashed line and arrowheads).
ROH: right occipital horn

img17-Intracerebral hemorrhage
Series of cranial CTs (noncontrast; axial section; from left to right, caudal to cranial views)
Top series: before trephination (burr hole procedure)
An intraparenchymal hyperdensity (circled in green) consistent with an intracerebral hematoma is visible in the right temporal lobe.
Bottom series: after trephination
The hematoma has been evacuated through a burr hole created in the right temporal bone. Note the hypodense air pockets (circled in red). This is expected after trephination, and the air will resorb with time. (The mastoid air pockets visible bilaterally in the bottom two images on the left are physiological.)

img18-Management of meningitis
BMP: basic metabolic panel
CBC: complete blood count
CRP: C-reactive protein
CSF: cerebrospinal fluid
DDx: differential diagnoses
HSV: herpes simplex virus
ICP: intracranial pressure
IV: intravenous
LP: lumbar puncture
PCR: polymerase chain reaction
VZV: varicella zoster virus