img1-Pitting edema of lower leg
The tissue is markedly edematous above the line to which the patient's sock had previously been pulled up. After applying pressure to the pretibial area, the residual indentation characteristic of pitting edema becomes visible.

img2-Necrotizing vasculitis of the fingers
Right hand of a 62-year-old female patient with suspected granulomatosis with polyangiitis

img3-Necrotizing vasculitis of the toes
Left foot of a 62-year-old patient with necrotizing vasculitis of the toes (I–IV)
Workup confirmed the diagnosis of granulomatosis with polyangiitis

img4-Glomerulonephritis in granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Photomicrograph of a kidney biopsy sample (H&E stain, very high magnification)
A renal corpuscle (center of the image) is seen with red (eosinophilic) fibrinoid necrosis at the upper pole of the glomerulus (blue overlay) and an inflammatory infiltrate comprising a mixture of neutrophils (examples indicated by arrowheads) and lymphocytes (examples indicated by yellow overlay).
These findings indicate glomerulonephritis. The diagnosis of granulomatosis with polyangiitis was made based on further biopsy findings not visible here (presence of necrotizing vasculitis in small-to-medium-sized renal blood vessels), additional laboratory studies (urinalysis), and clinical presentation (e.g., arthralgias, ocular involvement).

img5-Renal necrotizing vasculitis in granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Photomicrograph of a kidney biopsy sample (H&E stain, medium power magnification)
A medium-sized renal blood vessel is seen with infiltration of neutrophils (examples indicated by arrowheads) and an area of fibrinoid necrosis (red streaks; yellow overlay), indicating necrotizing vasculitis. There is also an abundance of extravascular histiocytes (epithelioid cells; examples indicated by arrows) and lymphoplasmacytic infiltrates (examples indicated by blue overlay) forming palisading granulomas.

img6-Postinfectious glomerulonephritis
Microscopic image of a kidney biopsy (PAS stain, high magnification)
A renal corpuscle surrounded by numerous tubules can be seen in the center of the image. Because the renal corpuscle is markedly enlarged, the space between the glomerular capillaries and the parietal layer of the Bowman capsule (black dashed outline) is narrowed. Within the glomerulus, there is hypercellularity due to proliferation of endothelial cells (yellow arrowheads) and mesangial cells (black arrowheads). Inflammatory infiltrate, predominantly neutrophils (blue arrowheads) and monocytes (white arrowheads), is also present. As a result, the lumina of the capillaries are not clearly identifiable.
This is the histopathologic appearance of postinfectious glomerulonephritis.

img7-IgA nephropathy
Photomicrograph of kidney tissue (PAS stain)
A glomerulus surrounded by numerous tubules is visible in the center of each image. There is a proliferation of mesangial cells (examples marked by yellow circles) with extracellular matrix deposition within the glomeruli. In IgA nephropathy, these changes can range from focal segmental (examples indicated by black arrows) to diffuse (examples indicated by yellow arrow-heads).
This is the characteristic histopathologic appearance of IgA nephropathy.
Blue outlines: Glomerular capillaries

img8-Red blood cell (RBC) casts in urine sediment
Photomicrograph of urine sediment (phase-contrast microscopy)
A tubular cast (blue overlay) is visible in the center of the image. The cast is composed of numerous RBCs, identifiable by their characteristic biconvex shape (examples outlined in yellow), in a matrix of fibrin and plasma proteins. Several epithelial cells surrounding the RBC cast are also visible.
RBC casts in urinary sediment are typically seen in glomerulonephritis.

img9-Cavitary lung nodules 1/2
CT chest (with contrast; axial plane; lung window) of a patient with history of granulomatosis with polyangiitis
A thick-walled cavitary lung nodule (overlay) is seen in the right lung apex.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA) is a multisystem c-ANCA positive necrotizing vasculitis that involves small to medium-sized blood vessels and shows a predilection for the respiratory system and kidneys. Pulmonary nodules are common and may cavitate. GPA can also manifest with pulmonary consolidation, hemorrhage, and interstitial opacities. Tracheal involvement can result in subglottic stenosis.
LBV: left brachiocephalic vein; RBV: right brachiocephalic vein; T: trachea