img1-Pitting edema of lower leg
The tissue is markedly edematous above the line to which the patient's sock had previously been pulled up. After applying pressure to the pretibial area, the residual indentation characteristic of pitting edema becomes visible.

img2-Diagnostic approach to pulmonary embolism
CTPA: computer tomography pulmonary angiogram
PE: pulmonary embolism
PERC: Pulmonary Embolism Rule-out Criteria
PTP: pretest probability
RV: right ventricle
V/Q scan: ventilation/perfusion scan

img3-Acute anterior ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)
12-lead ECG (paper speed: 25 mm/s)
- Sinus rhythm with a heart rate of ∼ 85/min
- Normal cardiac axis (leads I, II, and III positive, but difficult to interpret because of the ST changes)
- ST elevation in V2–V6, aVL, and slightly in I
- Reciprocal ST depression in leads II, III, and aVF

img4-Lobar pneumonia with parapneumonic effusion
X-ray chest (left: PA view; right: lateral view) of a patient with history of pneumonia
Extensive heterogeneous air space consolidation in the left upper lobe abuts part of the major fissure. A small pleural effusion is present.
Examples of causes of pulmonary consolidation that can mimic the appearance of infectious pneumonia include organizing pneumonia, malignancy (adenocarcinoma, lymphoma), and pulmonary hemorrhage.

img5-Airspace consolidation (1/2)
X-ray chest (PA view) of a febrile patient with a severe cough and right-sided chest pain
Heterogeneous opacification from consolidation in the middle and lower right lung projects through the right breast shadow. In the absence of comparison studies, the radiograph cannot distinguish whether the cause is acute or chronic.

img6-Airspace consolidation (2/2)
X-ray chest (lateral view)
Opacification (green overlay) projecting over the cardiac silhouette abuts the major fissure (black dashed line), which is slightly displaced superiorly consistent with a small component of volume loss. A PA view showed the abnormality to be located on the right side. The opacification is compatible with air space consolidation in the right middle lobe (ML). In the absence of comparison studies, the radiograph cannot distinguish whether the cause is acute or chronic.
LL: lower lobe; UL: upper lobe; white dashed line: minor fissure

img7-Left upper lobe pneumonia 1/2
X-ray chest (PA view)
A large area of opacification in the left lung obscures pulmonary vessels, the left heart border, and the left hilum. Air bronchograms are visible, consistent with the presence of air space disease. Non-visualization of the hilum limits the ability to assess for a central mass.

img8-Peripheral opacity (Hampton hump) from pulmonary embolism
X-ray chest (PA view) of a patient with pleuritic chest pain
A peripheral opacity (Hampton hump; green overlay) obscures the adjacent margin of the right hemidiaphragm. A Hampton hump is subpleural and is caused by pulmonary hemorrhage or infarction. The appearance is often wedge-shaped; however, it can alternatively be dome-shaped, if the apex is spared as a result of collateral bronchial arterial blood flow.
The differential diagnosis includes pneumonia and malignancy. Of note, the greater distance between the spinous processes and the medial edge of the clavicle on the right compared to the left indicates that the patient is rotated slightly to the right. The distances will be nearly equal when a patient is not rotated, whereas widening will be seen on the side to which a patient is rotated.
Dashed lines: margins of medial clavicles; White line and ellipses: spinous processes

img9-Pulmonary embolism
CT chest (with contrast; axial plane)
Large thromboemboli (green overlay) are visible as filling defects at the bifurcation of the pulmonary trunk (PT) and in the right and left pulmonary arteries.
AO: aorta; SVC: superior vena cava