Case 2: Abdominal pain

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Anna Bush, a 23-year-old female, comes to the emergency department because of abdominal pain.
Vital signs
Temperature: 101.3°F (38.5°C)
Blood pressure: 115/65 mm Hg
Heart rate: 85/min
Respirations: 22/min
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
Hold the part of your abdomen right over your right groin and act as if you are in severe pain when the examinee asks you to move.
Point at your abdomen right over your right groin when asked about the location of your pain.
If the examinee presses on the right lower part of your abdomen, pretend that it hurts and flex your abdominal muscles.
If the examinee presses on the right lower part of your abdomen, pretend that it hurts upon releasing the pressure.
If the examinee presses on the left lower part of your abdomen, say that the right lower portion of it hurts.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., ultrasound) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: Ask “Am I pregnant?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over or clicking on the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form or the abbreviation list will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
My stomach has been hurting since this morning.

Location
On the right side, right above the hip bone. 

Intensity (on a scale from 0–10)
At least a 9.

Quality
It is a really sharp pain.

Onset 
I had some dull belly pain last night, but it was not as bad as this and also not in just one spot like it is now. The pain I am having right now started this morning.

Precipitating events
None.

Progression/constant/intermittent
The pain is there all the time, and I feel like it has been getting worse.

Previous episodes
None.

Radiation
No.

Alleviating factors
The pain gets a little bit better if I do not move or if I lie down.

Aggravating factors
The pain gets a lot worse if I get up and walk around.

Associated symptoms
I feel really nauseous but I have not vomited.
Review of systems specific to acute abdominal pain

Recent travel 
No.

Fever/chills
I feel like I might have been running a fever since this morning. Did the nurse not take my temperature earlier?

Rash/skin changes 
No.

Pain in joints 
No.

Urinary problems
2 weeks ago, I had a few days where it burned a little bit when I had to pee, but it went away by itself. 

Bowel problems
I do not have diarrhea or constipation, just stomach pain.

Appetite 
I have not eaten anything since yesterday. I really do not have much of an appetite.

Weight changes
None.

Recent infections
Hmm, not that I remember.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
I had really bad acne when I was younger but it has gotten better over the last year. And then I had chlamydia 2 years ago, but they gave me some antibiotics and it went away, too.

Allergies
None.

Medications
Oral contraceptive pill.

Hospitalizations
Never.

Ill contacts
No.

Past surgical history 
None.

Family history
They are all healthy. Well, my mom says she has irritable bowel syndrome but I think that it is just stress.

Work
I am a college student.

Home
I live in a dorm. 

Alcohol
No.

Recreational drugs
Never.

Tobacco
No.

Diet 
I think I usually eat a balanced diet, lots of vegetables and some chicken or meat every couple of days.
Sexual history, OB/Gyn

Sexually active
Yes.

With whom
My boyfriend.

Pain during sex
Yes, it has actually been hurting over the past week. 

Number of partners over the past year
Two. My current boyfriend and my ex-boyfriend.

Protection
I use oral contraceptives, if that is what you mean? 

Last menstrual period
One week ago.

Menarche
When I was 13.

Duration of period
4–5 days.

Period regular
Every 28 days, because I take birth control.

How many tampons per day
Two.

Vaginal discharge
None right now, but I had a little about 2 weeks ago that went away by itself. 

Vaginal itching
No.

Vaginal dryness
No.

Pregnancies
No, I have never been pregnant, and I really do not want to have children yet.

Last Pap smear
Last spring, and everything was fine then.
A thorough sexual and gynecological history should be taken in female patients with lower abdominal pain, especially those with a history of dysuria!

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Cardiovascular examination 

Auscultation of the heart
Chest examination

Auscultation of the lungs
Abdominal examination

Inspection of the abdomen

Auscultation of the abdomen

Percussion of the abdomen

Palpation of the abdomen
Tenderness and guarding in the right lower quadrant

McBurney sign
Positive

Blumberg sign
Positive

Psoas sign
Negative

Rovsing sign
Positive
Examination of the Abdomen - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Abdomen - Clinical Examination

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling on safer sex practices.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.
Suggested response to challenge: “Ms. Bush, I understand that you are concerned about a possible pregnancy. Based on what you have told me today and because you take the birth control pill, it is unlikely that you are pregnant. Nonetheless, it is not possible for me to say with certainty whether or not you are pregnant without performing a pregnancy test. To be sure, I would like to order a pregnancy test for you, if you're okay with that. No matter what the results of that test might be, I can assure you that I will be there with you every step of the way.”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Acute appendicitis: In acute appendicitis, the visceral peritoneum is affected first, causing diffuse abdominal or periumbilical/epigastric pain. After 4–24 hours, irritation of the parietal peritoneum by the distended and inflamed appendix occurs, which leads to localized pain in the right lower quadrant with tenderness and guarding. This sequence of events is very typical for acute appendicitis. Physical exam findings such as a positive McBurney, Blumberg, and Rovsing sign are also highly suggestive of acute appendicitis. The condition is typically associated with fever, nausea, and anorexia, as seen in this patient. Appendicitis can occur at any age but is most common in children and young adults.
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID): Lower abdominal pain, fever, nausea, dysuria, dyspareunia, and abnormal vaginal discharge are typical clinical features in PID. While this patient's age and history of 2 sexual partners with whom she does not use barrier protection put her at increased risk for PID, the pain would usually be bilateral rather than localized to the right lower quadrant, and PID would not typically present with positive appendicitis signs (McBurney sign, Blumberg sign, Rovsing sign).
Ovarian torsion: Sudden onset, severe abdominal pain localized to the left or right lower quadrant in a woman of reproductive age is typical for ovarian torsion. The condition is often associated with nausea and can also present with a low-grade fever. However, this patient's pain was preceded by diffuse abdominal pain and the patient does not have any obvious risk factors for ovarian torsion (e.g., ovarian cyst, tumor, pregnancy).
Diagnostic studies
Pelvic examination: essential part of work-up in this patient to evaluate for PID and ovarian torsion 
Cervical and urethral swab: PID is most commonly caused by Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. 
Ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis: can be used to assess for acute appendicitis, ovarian torsion, and ruptured ovarian cyst  
CBC with differential: Acute appendicitis typically leads to mild leukocytosis with left shift.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate: Pelvic inflammatory disease and acute appendicitis would present with an elevated ESR.
Urine pregnancy test: to rule out (ectopic) pregnancy as a differential diagnosis as well as prior to ordering a CT of the abdomen
U/A, urine culture: should be performed in every female patient with lower abdominal pain to rule out a urinary tract infection 
Any woman of child-bearing age presenting with abdominal pain must have her beta-hCG levels checked to rule out pregnancy.
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Ruptured ovarian cyst 
Ectopic pregnancy
Pseudoappendicitis
See differential diagnosis of lower abdominal pain in women of reproductive age and differential diagnoses of acute abdomen.
Cervical discharge in gonorrhea (speculum view)
Cervical discharge in gonorrhea (speculum view)
Chlamydia trachomatis in McCoy cell culture
Chlamydia trachomatis in McCoy cell culture
Appendicitis with target sign
Appendicitis with target sign
Endometrioma (chocolate cyst)
Endometrioma (chocolate cyst)

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
