img1-Pitting edema of lower leg
The tissue is markedly edematous above the line to which the patient's sock had previously been pulled up. After applying pressure to the pretibial area, the residual indentation characteristic of pitting edema becomes visible.

img2-ECG in left ventricular hypertrophy
12-lead ECG (paper speed: 25 mm/s)
– Heart rate: ∼55/min
– Regular sinus rhythm
– Normal cardiac axis: positive (+) QRS complex polarity in leads I, II, and III
– Broad and bifid P waves (P): referred to as “P mitrale” and suggestive of left atrial enlargement
– SV2 (S) + RV5 (R) >3.5 mV: meets Sokolow-Lyon criteria for left ventricular hypertrophy
– Left ventricular strain pattern: ST depression (ST) with T-wave inversion (T) in left-sided leads I and V4–V6
Positive Sokolow-Lyon criteria and left ventricular strain pattern are characteristic of left ventricular hypertrophy.

img3-Flow-volume loop in obstructive and restrictive lung diseases
(1) The top graph is a normal flow-volume loop and a time-volume curve used to determine the FEV1.
(2) Obstructive lung diseases result in a concave flow-volume loop due to increased resistance. Absolute FEV1, as well as FEV1 relative to vital capacity (FEV1/FVC), is diminished.
(3) Restrictive lung diseases result in a narrowed flow-volume loop due to reduced vital capacity and compliance. Absolute FEV1 is diminished, but not in relation to vital capacity (FEV1/FVC).

img4-Measurement of forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1)
Spirogram: 3 breaths at rest followed by measurement of the forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1).
Procedure of FEV1 measurement: The patient takes a deep breath, then exhales as deeply and quickly as possible. The volume of gas that is exhaled during the first second is the FEV1. This value is then correlated with the forced vital capacity (FVC) and indicated as a percentage (FEV1/FVC ratio). The blue curve demonstrates healthy breathing, while the yellow curve illustrates breathing in COPD (attainment of maximum expiration is deferred due to airway obstruction and greatly decreased FEV1).
Additionally, various metrics are shown: IRV = inspiratory reserve volume, TV = tidal volume, ERV = expiratory reserve volume, RV = residual volume.

img5-Pulmonary hyperinflation (1/2)
Chest x-ray (PA view)
Large lung volumes (green outline and arrows) are accompanied by intercostal space widening (examples indicated by red arrows) and diaphragmatic flattening, indicating hyperinflation.

img6-Pulmonary hyperinflation (2/2)
Chest x-ray (lateral view)
Large lung volumes (outer green line and arrows) are accompanied by diaphragmatic flattening, hyperlucent lungs, and a prominent retrosternal space, indicating hyperinflation.

img7-Left ventricular enlargement (1/2)
X-ray chest (PA view)
The cardiac silhouette is enlarged, with the left heart border displaced laterally (green overlay) from its normal position (green outline) as a result of left ventricular enlargement.

img8-Left ventricular enlargement (2/2)
X-ray chest (lateral view)
The prominent convexity of the posterior border of the cardiac silhouette (green overlay; normal cardiac silhouette indicated by green outline) represents left ventricular (LV) enlargement (indicated by arrow). There is no obliteration of the retrosternal space (red overlay) to indicate right ventricular (RV) enlargement.

img9-Right upper lobe lung mass
X-ray chest (PA view) of a patient with lung cancer
An irregularly marginated mass-like opacity (green overlay) is present in the right upper lobe.