img1-Sclerodactyly in a patient with scleroderma
Fingers with claw-like flexion, deformed fingernails, induration on the second finger of the right hand at the level of the proximal interphalangeal joint.

img2-Management of GERD

img3-Achalasia
Barium swallow
Smooth funnel-shaped tapering (green overlay) in the region of the lower esophageal sphincter is accompanied by a widening (double-headed arrow) of the prestenotic distal esophagus (red overlay).
The appearance of the esophagus in achalasia is referred to as “bird-beak sign” (illustration). If the contour of the narrowed region is irregular and/or involves more than just the distal esophagus, the alternative diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma must be considered.

img4-Achalasia
Esophageal barium swallow
Funnel-shaped stenosis of the terminal esophagus; massive, prestenotic dilatation of the esophagus (arrows; bird-beak sign).

img5-Esophageal B-ring (Schatzki ring)
Barium swallow (lateral view): circular narrowing of the esophagus directly at the esophagogastric junction (Schatzki ring or B-ring). As opposed to A-rings (which are located just proximal to the EG junction), B-rings often can only be seen if there is a concomitant hiatal hernia. with which they are frequently associated (as is the case here).

img6-Distal esophageal stricture from carcinoma
Barium esophagram (frontal view) of a patient with a history of chronic gastroesophageal reflux and Barrett esophagus
Long segment narrowing of the distal esophagus is seen with irregularity of the mucosa and an apple-core configuration (green outline). The esophagus (E) is dilated proximal to the stricture.
This appearance suggests esophageal carcinoma.
S: stomach

img7-Malignant esophageal stricture
Barium esophagram (lateral view) of a patient with esophageal carcinoma
A long segment irregular stricture is seen in the mid third of the thoracic esophagus (green overlay). The superior aspect of the stricture has an apple-core appearance (indicated by dashed line).

img8-Esophageal carcinoma
Endoscopic view of the esophagus
An exophytic, irregularly demarcated mass with raised edges (green line) and central ulceration (dashed line) is partially obstructing the esophageal lumen.