Case 4: Vaginal bleeding

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Elaine Hill, a 50-year-old female, comes to the physician because of vaginal bleeding.
Vital signs
Temperature: 98.7°F (37°C)
Blood pressure: 118/79 mm Hg
Heart rate: 85/min
Respirations: 17/min
BMI: 32 kg/m2
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination (do not perform corneal reflex, breast, pelvic/genitourinary, or rectal examinations).
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
You are distrustful of medicine and doctors, and you treat the examinee with some suspicion.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., ultrasound) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: Ask “My doctor told me I had finally gone through menopause. Does this mean that is not the case?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over or clicking on the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form or the abbreviation list will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
I got my period again last week, but I thought I already went through menopause.

Onset
5 days ago.

Constant/intermittent
It started out with some spots in my underwear. It has been as heavy as a normal period the past 2 days, though.

Exact amount of bleeding for last 2 days
I had to use 3 pads per day.

Precipitating events
None.

Progression
Like I told you. Spotting until 2 days ago. Now it is like a period.

Previous episodes
None.

Frequency
This is the first time I have had this in 2 years.

Alleviating factors
No.

Aggravating factors
No.

Associated symptoms
I have been feeling fine otherwise.
Review of systems specific to vaginal bleeding in a postmenopausal woman

Trauma (to the pelvis)
No, nothing like that.

Swelling of the ankles 
No.

Fever/chills 
No.

Night sweats 
No.

Fatigue
Not really.

Urinary problems 
No.

Bowel problems
No.

Abdominal pain
No.

Appetite
Normal.

Weight changes
No. I am still on the heavier end of the scale.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
I was diagnosed with diabetes 5 years ago and with hypertension 2 years ago. 

Allergies
No.

Medications 
Metformin, metoprolol.

Hospitalizations
Just to have my kids.

Past surgical history
None.

Family history 
My dad has heart disease.

Work
I sell cosmetics from home.

Home
My kids are gone and I live alone, except for when I have someone over.

Alcohol
When I go out on the weekends, I have a drink or two.

Recreational drugs
No.

Tobacco 
I have smoked a pack a day since I was 15 years old.
Sexual history, OB/Gyn 

Sexually active
Yes.

With whom
Guys I meet at bars or online.

Number of partners over the past year
I have had about 10 different partners this year. 

Protection 
Sometimes I do not bother. I have gone through menopause anyway.

Sexually transmitted infection(s) in the past 
I had chlamydia about 7 years ago and was given some antibiotics for it.

HPV infection 
No, I do not have an infection, but I was also never tested.

Last menstrual period
2 years ago.

Age menopause started
45.

Any symptoms of menopause now 
No, that is all over, thank goodness.

Menarche
I was 9 years old. 

Vaginal discharge 
No, it is about the same as always, except for the blood.

Vaginal itching 
No.

Vaginal dryness
No.

Pregnancies 
I have 4 kids.

Abortions/miscarriages
No.

Last Pap smear 
Maybe 7 years ago when I had chlamydia? I did not get one in the past few years and I forgot what the results were last time.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination

Inspection of the conjunctivae 
Cardiovascular examination

Auscultation of the heart
Chest examination

Auscultation of the lungs
Abdominal examination

Inspection of the abdomen

Auscultation of the abdomen

Percussion of the abdomen

Palpation of the abdomen
Extremities

Examination for pitting edema  
Examination of the Abdomen - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Abdomen - Clinical Examination
Pitting edema of lower leg
Pitting edema of lower leg

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used non-medical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling on safer sex practices.

Examinee offered counseling on smoking cessation.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.
Suggested response to challenge: “Ms. Hill, I understand your concern about your symptoms. By definition, if you have not had a menstrual period for 12 months, you are in menopause, so we have to look for another cause of your vaginal bleeding. I would like to run a few tests today, do a pelvic exam, and get some imaging of your lower abdomen done. Once the results are back, you and I can talk about what to do next. What do you think about that?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Cervical cancer: Postmenopausal vaginal bleeding in a woman around 50 years of age should always raise suspicion for malignancy. This patient has a number of risk factors for cervical cancer (multiple sexual partners, history of a sexually transmitted infection, high parity, smoking history, last Pap smear was 8 years ago, no history of HPV testing), which makes it the most likely diagnosis in this case.
Endometrial cancer: Postmenopausal bleeding, a history of early menarche, and metabolic syndrome should prompt evaluation for endometrial cancer. Although it is the most common gynecological malignancy in the United States, this patient has a history of multiple pregnancies, which is a protective factor against endometrial cancer. Additionally, she has more risk factors for cervical cancer, making it the more likely diagnosis.
Endometrial polyp: Postmenopausal bleeding is often caused by endometrial polyps. Risk factors for the condition include hypertension and obesity, which are both present in this patient. However, the other two differential diagnoses are can't-miss diagnoses and should therefore be considered first.
Diagnostic studies
Pelvic examination: mandatory in all cases of postmenopausal vaginal bleeding
Rectal examination: to rule out a rectal cause of bleeding that was mistaken as vaginal bleeding
Pap smear, HPV testing: In patients 30–65 years of age, a Pap smear every 3 years OR a Pap smear with HPV testing (co-testing) every 5 years is recommended.  
CBC: to assess for possible anemia due to chronic blood loss
Transvaginal ultrasound: to assess for endometrial polyps and endometrial thickening, which is a sign of endometrial cancer
Endometrial biopsy: to assess for endometrial cancer
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Maximize table
Table Quiz
Common causes of postmenopausal bleeding 
Uterine causes	Cervical causes	Vaginal causes
Endometrial cancer
Endometrial polyp
Endometrial hyperplasia
Atrophic endometritis
Submucosal leiomyoma
Tamoxifen therapy
Hormone replacement therapy
Cervical cancer
Cervical polyp
Vaginal cancer
Atrophic vaginitis
See also painless vaginal bleeding.
Papanicolaou test showing HSIL
Papanicolaou test showing HSIL
Histopathological grades of cervical cancer
Histopathological grades of cervical cancer

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
