Case 1: Abdominal pain

Examinee instructions

Opening scenario
Marcia Billings, a 47-year-old female, comes to the emergency department because of abdominal pain.
Vital signs
Temperature: 99.5°F (37.5°C)
Blood pressure: 116/70 mm Hg
Heart rate: 102/minute
Respirations: 20/minute
BMI: 30 kg/m2
Examinee tasks
Take a focused history.
Perform a relevant physical examination.
Explain the preliminary differential diagnoses and initial workup plan to the patient.
Write the patient notes after leaving the room.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient encounter

Patient instructions
Sit hunched forward and act as if you have severe abdominal pain.
Point at the middle and upper right part of your abdomen when the examinee asks you about the location of your pain.
Tell the examinee that the pain is especially bad when they press on the middle and upper right part of your abdomen.
When the examinee asks you to breathe in while they press on the upper right part of your abdomen, start to breathe in and then stop suddenly because of severe pain.
You are not aware of the meanings of medical terms (e.g., ultrasound) and ask for clarification if the examinee uses them.
Use the checklists below for history, physical examination, and communication and interpersonal skills.
Challenge: If the examinee mentions your weight during the encounter, act offended and say, “Are you saying I'm fat?!”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused history

Hovering over or clicking on the speech bubbles  in the lists below will reveal extra information about the adjacent term. However, clicking on links will cause you to navigate away from the current case, at which point your progress (i.e., your check marks) will be lost. If you do want more information on a subject, either open the link in a new tab or wait until you and your partner have finished the case and reviewed the check marks. Following the link to the patient note form or the abbreviation list will not interrupt your progress.
History of present illness

Chief complaint
Pain in my stomach.

Location
In the middle and upper right part. 

Intensity (on a scale from 1–10)
8–9.

Quality
Dull. 

Onset
12 hours ago. 

Precipitating events
It started pretty soon after dinner yesterday. 

Progression/constant/intermittent
It has not really gone away since yesterday evening. I think it is actually getting worse.

Previous episodes
None like this. I have had some stomach pain after meals before, but it has always gotten better after a couple of hours.

Radiation
It hurts really bad all the way around to my back.  And I also have some pain in my right shoulder. 

Alleviating factors
I tried a warm water bottle, but that did not do anything. Sitting hunched over or lying on my side seems to help a little. 

Aggravating factors
Moving and lying down on my back.

Associated symptoms
I felt sick to my stomach after dinner and threw up three times last night. I also feel a little warm, like I might have a little bit of a fever.

Color and amount of emesis
First I threw up what I ate for dinner. Afterwards it was just yellow liquid.

Blood in emesis
Not that I noticed. Sounds awful!
Review of systems specific to recurrent abdominal pain

Recent travel 
Our last family vacation was 4 months ago.

Where to?
We went camping in Yosemite.

Fatigue
Just the normal tiredness that comes from chasing after kids.

Rash/skin changes
No.

Yellow skin color 
No.

Urinary problems
No.

Changes in urine color 
No.

Bowel problems
No.

Changes in stool color 
No.

Blood in stool
No.

Appetite
Before this episode I was eating the same amount as usual.

Weight changes
Not that I have noticed.

Recent infections
No.
Past medical history, family history, and social history

Past medical history
My doctor just says I should lose weight. 

Allergies
No.

Medications
Sometimes I take antacids at night when I cannot sleep because of heartburn.

Frequency
A couple times a month, after a big dinner late at night. But when I take the antacids it goes away and I can sleep. 

Hospitalizations
Just for the birth of each of my 2 children.

Ill contacts
No.

Past surgical history
None.

Family history
My father died of a stroke when he was 65. My mother has gallstones. 

Work
I am a financial consultant.

Home
I live with my husband and 2 children. It is chaotic sometimes, but we do well together.

Alcohol
1–2 glasses of wine with dinner most nights. I had a little more than that the past 2 days because we had guests. 

Felt need to cut down on your drinking?
No.

Felt annoyed by people criticizing your drinking?
No.

Felt guilty about drinking?
No.

Felt the need to drink first thing in the morning?
No.

Recreational drugs
Never.

Tobacco
Never.

Exercise
I just cannot find the time.

Diet
I cook what the kids like to eat best – mac 'n' cheese, spaghetti and meatballs – comfort food like that. 

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Focused physical examination


Washed hands

Used respectful draping
Head, eyes, ears, nose, and throat examination

Inspection of the sclera 
Cardiovascular examination 

Auscultation of the heart
Chest examination

Auscultation of the lungs
Abdominal examination

Inspection of the abdomen

Auscultation of the abdomen

Percussion of the abdomen

Palpation of the abdomen
Tenderness in the epigastrium and right upper quadrant

Murphy sign
Positive 

Skin examination 
Murphy's sign
Murphy's sign
Murphy Sign - Clinical Examination
Murphy Sign - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Abdomen - Clinical Examination
Examination of the Abdomen - Clinical Examination

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Communication and interpersonal skills

Patient interaction

Examinee knocked on the door.

Examinee introduced him- or herself and identified his/her role.

Examinee correctly used the patient's name.

Examinee asked open-ended questions.

Examinee listened attentively (did not interrupt the patient).

Examinee showed interest in the patient as a person (i.e., appeared caring and showed respect).

Examinee demonstrated the ability to support the patient's emotions (i.e., offered words of support, asked for clarification).

Examinee discussed initial diagnostic impressions with the patient.

Examinee explained the management plan.

Examinee used nonmedical terms and provided reasons for planned steps in management.

Examinee evaluated the patient's agreement with the next diagnostic steps.

Examinee asked about concerns or questions.
Counseling and challenge

Examinee offered counseling on support options for weight and diet changes.

Examinee reacted appropriately to challenge.
Suggested response to challenge: “Ms. Billings, I understand that you may be sensitive about your weight, and it is not my intention to lecture you. I can assure you that, as your physician, I want you to be in the very best possible health, and it is my job to look for ways for the two of us to get you there, together. Would you be interested in discussing some options for how we can do that?”

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Patient note

To access the sample patient note, you must first submit your own. Please enter your patient note in this form: access the patient note here.

For reference, see our list of common abbreviations for the patient note, which is similar to the list that will be posted at every station during your CS exam: access the abbreviation list here.

Common abbreviations in the patient note
Common abbreviations in the patient note

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
Further discussion

Patient note
Differential diagnoses
Cholecystitis: The pain associated with cholecystitis is usually constant and prolonged (> 6 hours), which is the case in this patient. It is also typically worse after meals and associated with nausea and vomiting. Even though this patient does not have jaundice and only has a low-grade fever, a positive Murphy sign is characteristic of acute cholecystitis, making this the most likely differential diagnosis.
Biliary pancreatitis: This patient's risk factors for cholelithiasis also put her at risk for biliary pancreatitis. Symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, pain after eating, pain radiating to the back, and improvement of the pain on leaning forward are common in acute pancreatitis. However, the presence of right upper quadrant pain and a positive Murphy sign make this diagnosis less likely than cholecystitis.
Choledocholithiasis: This patient has a number of risk factors for cholelithiasis (obesity, female sex, multiparity, > 40 years of age, and family history), which puts her at an increased risk for choledocholithiasis as well. Her past episodes of abdominal pain after meals might have been due to choledocholithiasis, and her right upper quadrant pain and nausea and vomiting are also consistent with this diagnosis. However, the pain in choledocholithiasis is usually colicky rather than constant, and the Murphy sign would not be present in uncomplicated choledocholithiasis, making this diagnosis less likely than acute cholecystitis.
The risk factors for cholelithiasis can be remembered with the 6 F's: Fat, Female, Fertile, Forty, Fair-skinned, Family history. Cholelithiasis can lead to cholecystitis, biliary pancreatitis, and choledocholithiasis.
Diagnostic studies
Ultrasound of the abdomen: best initial imaging test in gallstone disease and suspected biliary pancreatitis 
Alkaline phosphatase, GGT, total and direct bilirubin: Laboratory signs of cholestasis are ↑ alkaline phosphatase, ↑ GGT, ↑ total and ↑ direct bilirubin.
AST, ALT: used to assess for possible liver cell damage
Amylase, lipase: important markers of pancreatic inflammation
CBC: Leukocytes are likely to be elevated in this patient, especially if she has cholecystitis or biliary pancreatitis.
Electrolytes, calcium: Calcium is an important prognostic marker in pancreatitis.
CT of the abdomen: not routinely used for the suspected main differentials but can be used in acute pancreatitis to assess for severity and complications 
ERCP: can be both diagnostic and therapeutic, as it can help to visualize and extract gallstones from the bile ducts 
Tumefactive biliary sludge
Tumefactive biliary sludge
Gallbladder calculi and wall thickening
Gallbladder calculi and wall thickening
Endoscopic view of the major duodenal papilla
Endoscopic view of the major duodenal papilla
Other differential diagnoses to consider
Acute cholangitis
Acute hepatitis (e.g., hepatitis A, hepatitis B, hepatitis C)
Gastroesophageal reflux, gastritis, gastrointestinal ulcers
Nephrolithiasis
Posterior wall myocardial infarction
For more differentials, see also differential diagnoses of acute abdomen and other causes of acute pancreatitis.

Collapse

Notes

Feedback
